# METADATA
author: Charpin D.
source_id:Charpin2014_TheHistori
title: The Historian And The Old Babylonian Archives
Year: 2014
Source_ID:  Charpin2014_TheHistori
Source_Type: Article in Book: DOCUMENTARY SOURCES IN ANCIENT NEAR EASTERN ANDGRECO-ROMAN ECONOMIC HISTORY Methodology and Practice
Source_Role,Step_distance:2 ,3,4 
Pages: 24-64
Web: 
Published in the United Kingdom in 2014 by OXBOW BOOKS
10 Hythe Bridge Street, Oxford OX1 2E

# TEXT

This pdf of your paper in Documentary Sources in Ancient Near Eastern
and Greco-Roman Economic History belongs to the publishers Oxbow
Books and it is their copyright.
As author you are licenced to make up to 50 offprints from it, but
beyond that you may not publish it on the World Wide Web until
three years from publication (November 2017), unless the site is a
limited access intranet (password protected). If you have queries
about
 this please contact the editorial department at Oxbow Books
(editorial@oxbowbooks.com).
An offprint from
DOCUMENTARY SOURCES IN
ANCIENT NEAR EASTERN AND
GRECO-ROMAN ECONOMIC HISTORY
M P
ethodology and ractice
edited by
Heather D. Baker and Michael Jursa
Hardback Edition: ISBN 978-1-78297-651-6
Digital Edition: ISBN 978-1-78297-759-9
© Oxbow Books 2014
Oxford & Philadelphia
www.oxbowbooks.com
Published in the United Kingdom in 2014 by
OXBOW BOOKS
10 Hythe Bridge Street, Oxford OX1 2EW
and in the United States by
OXBOW BOOKS
908 Darby Road, Havertown, PA 19083
© Oxbow Books and the individual contributors 2014
Hardback Edition: ISBN 978-1-78297-651-6
Digital Edition: ISBN 978-1-78297-759-9
A CIP record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Documentary sources in ancient Near Eastern and Greco-Roman economic history : methodology and
practice / edited by Heather D. Baker and Michael Jursa.
pages cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-1-78297-758-2
1. Economic history--To 500. 2. Babylonia--Economic conditions. 3. Rome--Economic conditions--30
B.C.-476 A.D. 4. Rome--Economic conditions--510-30 B.C. 5. Egypt--Economic conditions--332 B.C.-640
A.D. I. Baker, Heather D. II. Jursa, Michael.
HC31.D63 2014
330.935’5--dc23
2014027157
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any
means, electronic or mechanical including photocopying, recording or by any information storage
and retrieval system, without permission from the publisher in writing.
Printed in the United Kingdom by Short Run Press, Exeter
For a complete list of Oxbow titles, please contact:
UNITED KINGDOM UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
Oxbow Books Oxbow Books
Telephone (01865) 241249, Fax (01865) 794449 Telephone (800) 791-9354, Fax (610) 853-9146
Email: oxbow@oxbowbooks.com Email: queries@casemateacademic.com
www.oxbowbooks.com www.casemateacademic.com/oxbow
Oxbow Books is part of the Casemate Group
Cover details: P.Vindob. G 2119 Recto (Papyrus, Hermupolis, 6th/7th century AD): SPP III2 97. Receipt for
the payment of rents as share of an inheritance. SPP III2 97. © Österreichische Nationalbibliothek,
Papyrussammlung. BM 77394 (Cuneiform tablet, Babylon, 494 BC): H.D. Baker, The Archive of the Nappāḫu
Family. Vienna, 2004, p. 401, no. 66a. Promissory note for silver with temple prebend as security. © H.D.
Baker and the Institut für Orientalistik, Universität Wien.
Table of Contents
Preface v
Contributors vi
1. Introduction 1
M. Jursa
2. House Size and Household Structure: Quantitative Data
in the Study of Babylonian Urban Living Conditions 7
H. D. Baker
3. The Historian and the Old Babylonian Archives 24
D. Charpin
4. The Old Assyrian Trade and its Participants 59
J. G. Dercksen
5. Economic Development in Babylonia from the Late 7th
to the Late 4th Century BC: Economic Growth and
Economic Crises in Imperial Contexts 113
M. Jursa
6. Legal Institutions and Agrarian Change in the Roman Empire 139
D. Kehoe
7. The Papyrological Evidence for Water-Lifting Technology 154
M. Malouta
8. Plagues and Prices: Locusts 163
R. Pirngruber
9. On Payment Transactions and Monetisation in the Rural Region of
Late Antique Egypt: the Case Study of Small-Format Documents 187
S. Tost
10. Social Network Analysis of Cuneiform Archives—a New Approach 207
C. Waerzeggers
CoTnittelents v
PRICES IN THE ANCIENT MEDITERRANEAN AND NEAR EAST
11. The Volatility of Prices of Barley and Dates in Babylon
in the Third and Second Centuries BC 234
R. J. van der Spek
12. Wheat Prices in Ptolemaic Egypt 260
S. von Reden
13. Mediterranean Grain Prices c. 300 to 31 BC: the Impact of Rome 289
D. Rathbone
14. Mediterranean and Near Eastern Grain Prices c. 300 to 31 BC:
Some Preliminary Conclusions 313
D. Rathbone
Index 323
3
The Historian and the Old Babylonian Archives1
Dominique Charpin
“There is no such thing as an ordinary inscription,
only an ordinary way of looking at it”
Jean Sauvaget
Published Old Babylonian archives constitute a considerable collection of texts, the
number of which, until now and to my knowledge, has not been specified in any
publication. On 1st January 2008 the project entitled “ARCHIBAB” (Archives
babyloniennes, XXe–XVIIe siècles) was launched.1 Among its objectives is assembling
the entire corpus of Old Babylonian archival documents into a digital database. The
first phase has consisted of creating a bibliography, which has yielded a figure of 29,228
fully published texts.2 This means that, for a period of four centuries, there is an
1 This study was undertaken within the framework of the “ARCHIBAB (Archives babyloniennes,
XXe–XVIIe siècles) project,” financed in 2008–2010 by ANR (Agence Nationale de la Recherche) under
the rubric “Corpus et outils de la recherche en sciences humaines et sociales”. I would like to thank
Antoine Jacquet for his valuable contribution to this project as well as several members of the group
“Mondes mésopotamiens” of the UMR 7192, Lucile Barberon, Lionel Marti, and Hervé Reculeau, who
also contributed to this project.
For a political rather than economic approach, using the royal correspondence in particular, see
Charpin 2012.
This project begins in the same year that marks the end, after six years, of the START project,
“The Economic History of Babylonia in the First Millennium BC,” directed by M. Jursa. I take this as an
auspicious sign, considering the significant accomplishments of the Viennese group.
2 This figure, established 30/10/2008, is subject to a slight increase. It consists of texts published
in full. Texts that have only been subject to citation (however long) were not included, nor were
those described in various catalogues such as those of the British Museum and Yale (Figulla 1961;
Sigrist et al. 1996; Sigrist et al. 2006; Beckman 1995; Beckman 2000).
3 The Historian and the Old Babylonian Archives 25
average of 70 texts for each year, or one text for every five days. To be sure, the
significance of such an average is questionable when certain decades are practically
undocumented, while others are abundantly so.3 This number nevertheless gives an
idea of the abundance of documentation available for this period of Mesopotamian
history.4 While this figure may appear low compared to the Ur III period (for which,
according to the BDTNS, there are over 86,000 texts for a period of one century),5 and
without indulging in “academic prejudice,” it should be noted that Old Babylonian
archives are more diverse and richer than what is extant from the previous century,
the bulk of which consists of short accounting documents.6 The number of letters and
legal documents in the Old Babylonian archives is, by contrast, much greater, and the
geographical distribution of the archives is much broader.
I would like to use the occasion of this symposium to present an overview of Old
Babylonian archives and how the ARCHIBAB program was designed to tackle them.
By way of illustration from this large collection, I have chosen three specific examples
to discuss:
1) The richest set of archives, both in terms of number and quality, found in the
palace of Mari and dated to the 18th century BCE
2) A type of text: the loan document
3) And a historical event: the “real estate boom” at Larsa in the half-century
spanning the years 1840 to 1790
Quantitative (“sérielle”) history, best represented in France by historians such as P.
Chaunu and E. Le Roy Ladurie, was in fashion when I was still a student. Today this
methodology is considered outdated. However, I believe it deserves to be explored and
developed. Assyriologists have amply demonstrated the importance of taking
quantitative information mentioned in the texts into account in their work.7 The
problem remains that we must be able to determine the exact nature of the texts that
have been handed down to us, in order to know how representative are these samples
that were produced by the accident of excavation (whether illicit or controlled).
3 It is noteworthy that the average of one text every five days corresponds to that of the archives
of the house of Ur-Utu at Tell ed-Dêr: see Tanret 2004, 35.
4 Studies of Mesopotamian archives from various periods are found in the work edited by Brosius
2003. Earlier work on the topic, found in the volume edited by Veenhof 1986, continues to be relevant.
5 http://bdts.filol.csic.es/about_uk.php.
6 If we take into account the number of lines, the Old Babylonian corpus is larger than that of
Ur III, from a strictly numerical standpoint.
7 I am thinking in particular of the work done by G. Visicato on Presargonic Fara.
26 Dominique Charpin
1. OLD BABYLONIAN ARCHIVES AND THE “ARCHIBAB” PROJECT8
We begin with a brief introduction to Old Babylonian archives and to the conception
of ARCHIBAB, according to the archives’ varying characteristics. Some preliminary
results of the project will then be presented.
1.1 State of the question
It is my intention to present here the archives, not only by stressing their qualitative
aspects, as is commonly done, but also by taking into account their quantitative
features.
1.1.1 RICH AND ABUNDANT ARCHIVES
During the Old Babylonian period, 2000–1600 BCE,9 the Ancient Near East experienced
great cultural unity, despite encountering periods of political fragmentation, before
and after the years of domination by the kingdom of Babylon under Hammu-rabi and
his successor.10 The use of writing developed considerably during these four centuries,
providing us with a significant number of archives. These come no longer solely from
large institutions, such as palaces and temples, as is largely the case during the third
millennium. The first half of the second millennium yields numerous family archives
from the houses of individuals – a clear innovation. The fact that cuneiform tablets
were, almost exclusively, the writing medium, explains the large number of texts
preserved. In the first millennium, the competing presence of papyrus and leather
led to the gradual drying up of texts preserved as tablets.11
The ARCHIBAB project is dedicated to archival documents. It thus excludes the
other two large corpora of the period: the so-called “literary” texts, stemming from
the scholarly tradition and primarily known from school copies; and the “royal
inscriptions,” commemorative texts celebrating the achievements of the sovereigns.
These two text categories have long been the object of study by specialists. They are
in the process, moreover, of being assembled into an adequate corpus.12 Archival
documents, meanwhile, have been relatively neglected, despite their crucial
significance to the study of social, economic, cultural, and political life.
8 This first section replicates certain parts of the ARCHIBAB project report submitted to the
ANR, now online (www.digitorient.com/?p=168). Results from after January 2008 have also been
incorporated.
9 Until a consensus is reached on the absolute chronology, the ARCHIBAB project uses the so-
called “middle” chronology (Hammu-rabi: 1792–1750 BCE).
10 For a recent synthesis, see Charpin, Edzard and Stol 2004.
11 See Jursa 2005, 1 (16,000 published documents, spanning the period from the end of the 8th
century to 331 BCE).
12 For “literary” texts in the Sumerian language, see the ETCSL site. The Akkadian language
corpus is being assembled by M. Streck and N. Wasserman (http://www.seal.uni-leipzig.de/). For
royal inscriptions, see the corpus edited by Frayne 1990 and most recently Charpin 2006.
3 The Historian and the Old Babylonian Archives 27
From a typological point of view, the documents can be divided into two broad
categories: those that were intended to be preserved and those that were of limited
temporal value. The first category includes property titles: sale contracts (fields,
orchards, houses, and slaves), descriptions of inheritance, as well as documents
establishing the status of people and their property (marriage, adoption, and
manumission). The documents deemed without long-term value or effect include:
letters intended for practically instantaneous long distance communication, accounting
documents, and short-term contracts (loans, hires, and rentals). The study of Old
Babylonian archives has led to the conclusion that such documents were sorted out
from time to time,13 based on a two-fold phenomenon observed in the family archives.
First, the documents that were meant to be preserved go back as far as two centuries
and more,14 as illustrated, for example, by the archives of Ur-Utu from Tell ed-Dêr.15
Second, the closer one gets to the end date of the archive, the more the documents
become varied in content, the short-term texts not having been sorted out.16 It is
important to emphasise, moreover, another difference between family archives and
those of large institutions, such as the temple and palace: the span of time covered
by this last group (large institutions) is noticeably shorter. This is because, for the
most part, they contain only short-term documents, which were sorted out on a regular
basis. It may be possible to attribute this to the vicissitudes of political life.17 The
abundance of family archives, which distinguishes second-millennium Mesopotamia
from previous centuries, can be explained by two wholly independent factors.18 The
first is that the archaeological situation is such that levels of habitation prior to the
second millennium have rarely been excavated, accounting for the lack of “private”
archives for these periods.19 The second is associated with the considerable expansion
of the use of writing that took place in the first centuries of the second millennium.20
This led to a much broader geographical distribution of texts than that found for the
third millennium, as well as a considerable number of archives.21
With these archives it is possible to write on every aspect of Babylonian history.
13 For a general overview, see the proceedings of the colloquium “Les phénomènes de fin
d’archives en Mésopotamie” (Joannès 1995).
14 See my study on “Transmission des titres de propriété et constitution des archives privées en
Babylonie ancienne” (Charpin 1986). A revised version of this contribution appears as Chapter 4 in
Charpin 2010a.
15 See Van Lerberghe and Voet 1991, in anticipation of Tanret, Janssen and Dekiere forthcoming.
16 This is attested, for example, in the archives of the family of Dadâ at Isin; for now see Charpin
2000a, 200f. For the occurrence of several expired documents preserved in the Ur-Utu archives, see
Tanret 2008.
17 See Charpin, Edzard and Stol 2004, 55f.
18 Stone 2002.
19 Ur III Nippur seems to be an exception, but see van Driel 1994.
20 See my book Charpin 2008a and the revised English edition Charpin 2010b.
21 M. Jursa calculated that 132 Neo-Babylonian archives have been found (Jursa 2005). We are
not yet able to provide an approximate number for the Old Babylonian period; it will be one of the
results of the ARCHIBAB project.
28 Dominique Charpin
While social and economic history takes the foreground, they also shed light on the
history of religious and cultural institutions, as well as on political events. And while,
in matters concerning the economy and society, these documents are mostly relevant
to the elite – since the poor did not have archives –, certain processes of impoverishment
within the upper echelons of society are, nevertheless, perceivable. Families were
forced to borrow money on a regular basis and eventually sell their inheritance to
more fortunate neighbours. Sovereigns intervened from time to time, especially at
their accession, but also in periods of economic crises. By proclaiming mîšarum edicts,
they cancelled arrears owed to the palace, as well as debts between individuals.22 The
merchants’ archives allow us to understand long distance trade (towards the Arab-
Persian Gulf or Anatolia), as well as local exchange, subjects which have often been
neglected by scholars. Using these archives one can, likewise, write on the history of
families and households; one can also reconstruct genealogies, inheritance procedure,
and the status of women, among others.
1.1.2 RESEARCH DIFFICULTIES
The vast potential wealth of the Old Babylonian archives remains under-exploited
owing to an absence of adequate tools for their study. Texts from controlled excavations
have been, for the most part, satisfactorily published in monographs and collections,23
even if the pace of publication has not always proceeded as quickly as one would
hope.24 Most disconcerting, however, is the presence of the thousands of texts obtained
from illicit excavations over the past century and a half, which have then been dispersed
into public and private collections: access to their content is often difficult. The
attendant problems are multiple. The absence of editions and the scattered state of
the archives I would stress as the most daunting.
For the most part, texts have been published as hand-copies. At best, these
publications include a catalogue (often very succinct) and indices (generally limited
to personal, geographical, topographical, and divine names). When these are available,
they are often outdated. Moreover, collections are often published as they are,
containing texts from vastly different periods and genres. It is not uncommon,
furthermore, that an Assyriologist who publishes a collection containing Old
Babylonian texts is not a specialist in Old Babylonian archives, and that his or her
understanding of the texts suffers from a lack of familiarity with this type of source.
22 For more details regarding this situation see below, § 2.2.
23 See my annotated bibliography in Charpin, Edzard and Stol 2004, 403–80, and the appendix
below.
24 It is unfortunate that only 55 letters from the hundreds of Old Babylonian texts found at Tell
Asmar in the 1930s have so far been published, and only 150 texts out of some 3,000 discovered at
Tell Harmal, and that the bulk of the archives unearthed at Tell ed-Dêr in 1975, Terqa since 1975,
and Tell Leilan in 1985–87, remain unedited. On the other hand, we can rejoice at the speed with
which the 210 texts found in 2000–2002 at Chagar-Bazar were published by D. Lacambre and A. Millet
Albà (cf. Tunca and Baghdo 2008). The publication of the Mari archives began 70 years ago and
continues at the average rate of 100–200 new texts each year.
3 The Historian and the Old Babylonian Archives 29
A recent example of this are the two volumes of Old Babylonian texts from the Horn
collection,25 an American collection containing primarily late third-millennium texts
(Third Dynasty of Ur), along with which the editor has published early second-
millennium texts (more than 300) in a way unsatisfactory to a specialist of the period.26
Assyriology functions, as a result of the phenomena observed above, in a world of
personal index-cards, where individuals must spend considerable time creating and
indexing their own corpus of transcriptions. This problem is clearly exacerbated over
time, leading to a loss of interest in this kind of research that could otherwise be so
rich a resource for the study of the economic and social life of the period. The urgency
of a collective effort is, thus, clear to all involved.
Another problem is linked to the way in which these collections have been
assembled. The existence of illegal excavations cannot be sufficiently deplored. Not
only are these morally and legally condemnable, but their scientific ramifications are
appalling. The antiquities market functions in such a way that the groupings in which
documents are originally found are often dispersed: the components of the archives
of one family are thus scattered among many different collections.27 Thus, the archives
of a creditor named Ibni-Amurrum had to be reconstituted from tablets in the Louvre,
Yale, and the Horn Collection.28 There are many such examples. It is evident that there
is little purpose in studying isolated documents. And it is only when texts of these
types are incorporated into the corpus to which they belong that they acquire their
full meaning.
1.1.3 THE PRESENT CORPUS
It would be difficult to begin with anything other than the Mari archives, the traditional
corpus of which is found in the Archives Royales de Mari, begun after the Second World
War and currently comprising 30 volumes. For the most part, the texts are reproduced
in facsimile (copies and/or photos), edited (transcriptions and translations), and
annotated. The ARM series was complemented with MARI (8 volumes that appeared
from 1981 to 1997), as well as with the new collection of Florilegium Marianum (10
volumes since 1992).
Otherwise, the only “living” Old Babylonian corpus is characterised by one particular
genre: the letter. This corpus can be found in the series Altbabylonische Briefe, from the
University of Leiden (14 volumes appeared between 1964 and 2006; the translations
are in German for 9 volumes and in English for the other 5, including the last 4). The
corpus presently includes 2,762 letters. The pragmatism of the series’ founder, F. R.
Kraus, led him to sequence the volumes according to the location of the tablets, in
order to facilitate their collation, and with the objective of producing the best edition
25 Sigrist 1990; 2003.
26 See my review of AUCT 4 (Charpin 1993) and my review article of AUCT 5 (Charpin 2005a).
27 Not to mention the “sorting” that sometimes occurs when the tablets that are in bad shape
are eliminated before the sale so as not to diminish the value of the lot…
28 See Charpin 2000a, in particular 198f. and 206–10, to be supplemented by Charpin 2005a, 412.
30 Dominique Charpin
possible. The focus of the project was first and foremost philological, to the extent
that AbB does not even include an index of proper names. The downside of this approach
is that it isolates the letters from non-epistolary archival documents to which they
are related (only the most recent volumes provide prosopographical indications to
help the reader situate the letters in their archival context). Letters, moreover, rarely
indicate the location and date of composition. It is often only in relation to these other
documents that the letters’ location in space and time can be determined, something
that is significant for the study of dialect. Lastly, to this day the series has yet to be
completed. The result being that it is impossible to quickly and easily have access to
all of the letters written by the kings of Babylon between 1880 and 1595, or, even more
limitedly, to the letters authored by Hammu-rabi. This situation constitutes a clear
hindrance to research on institutions and on political, economic, and social life.
The other corpora of edited material are quite old and have long since ceased. The
principal one is the six-volume Hammurabis Gesetz, the last of which appeared in 1923.
This work has the inconvenience of providing only translations without transcriptions.
Other projects have been announced but have not yet been realised. These have
usually focused on a particular type of text, such as the lawsuit collection announced
by E. Dombradi, meant to replace M. Schorr’s volume from 1913.29 The disadvantage
of such a corpus is that it isolates the documents from their archival context, leading
to a strictly typological approach through which many elements of the texts find little
elucidation. The archives from an Isin family are a good illustration of the situation:
a lawsuit pitted two family members against each other, a situation which is inexplicable
without knowing that the two brothers were in exile at the time. This fact can only
be determined from other documents from their archives.30
Many existing research tools are outdated, moreover. Such is the case with the
Répertoire géographique des textes cunéiformes III, dedicated to Old Babylonian texts,
published in 1980 and never updated. A complete revision of the volume is very much
in order. Indeed the corpus has increased by 12,000 texts since 1980, from slightly
fewer than 17,000 to more than 29,000…
To date, the only database dedicated to Old Babylonian texts is the Old Babylonian
Text Corpus (OBTC), available on the internet.31 Created and maintained by a group
of Czech researchers, it focuses exclusively on the philology and palaeography of Old
Babylonian Akkadian texts of all genres.32 The objectives of ARCHIBAB, however, are
very different and will in no way compete with OBTC.
29 Schorr 1913. See Dombradi 1996.
30 Charpin 2000b, especially 77f., nos. 36f.
31 http://www.klinopis.cz/.
32 Its value is more pedagogical than scientific investigation, as evidenced, for example, by the
fact that the palaeography is based on published copies.
3 The Historian and the Old Babylonian Archives 31
1.2 The ARCHIBAB project
A good project is one designed to be carried out in stages. It is thus necessary to
determine what the essential needs are, on the one hand, and what can be reasonably
completed at a later date, on the other. The ARCHIBAB project was conceived with
these concerns in mind. It is also based on the idea that a project of this sort must be
carried out by a small and carefully assembled research team, which is also open to
the outside scientific community on both the European and the international level
– the number of Old Babylonian specialists in countries where Assyriology is studied,
being, admittedly, somewhat limited.
The project, then, is composed of three parts: a general guide and bibliography, a
digital database, and a series of monographs.
1.2.1 GENERAL GUIDE AND BIBLIOGRAPHY
In 2005, E. Frahm (Yale University) and M. Jursa created a new series entitled GMTR,
Guides to the Mesopotamian Textual Records. The purpose of this series is to create a guide
to facilitate the utilisation of the hundreds of thousands of cuneiform documents from
all periods. The first volume in the series is devoted to Neo-Babylonian documents.33
The editors of the series have asked me to be in charge of the volume on Old Babylonian
archives.34 The resulting monograph will present the main types of documents (form,
content, etc.) as well as principal text groups, arranged by city.
We thereby intend to create a bibliography. A need for one has been long felt. J.
Renger announced over thirty years ago a “Bibliographie der altbabylonischen Rechts-
und Verwaltungsurkunden,” with specifications of geographical origin and references
or attributions of the texts to the different archives.35 This project, unfortunately,
never saw the light of day, and the need for it is now felt more than ever. It should,
furthermore, be accessible in two ways, both in book form and online. Prepared by A.
Jacquet, it will have the advantage of serving as an annotated bibliography. The online
bibliography will be searchable using multiple criteria and will be updated regularly.
1.2.2. THE DIGITAL DATABASE
A prototype of the structure of the database was established in January–February 2008
and, in March, was presented in Paris to a group of experts at a round-table, consisting
of Old Babylonian specialists and colleagues with long experience of online databases.
Based on their recommendations, a definitive version of the structure was created,
needing only minor modifications.36
33 Jursa 2005.
34 Provisionally entitled Old Babylonian Archival Documents; Letters, Legal Records and Administrative
Texts.
35 Renger 1977, 28.
36 This database was created with the program “4D.” It functions in Unicode, eliminating the
longstanding problems associated with diacritical signs. I will not go into details of the design of
the database at present.
32 Dominique Charpin
1.2.2.1 T B
he iBliography
The first table is dedicated to the BIBLIOGRAPHIE (bibliography). Each publication
(book, article, etc.) is entered, no matter what kind: copies, editions, commentaries.37
If the publication is available on the internet, a link is established (URL), which allows
for its immediate access.38 Various ways of searching are possible: name of author(s)
of the publication; title (partial if necessary); abbreviation of the review or collection;
volume, and year. All combinations are possible. One of the riches of Assyriology, as
an academic field, is its production of numerous and thorough reviews, often appearing
years after the book. While several bibliographical works make these available – such
as the Keilschriftbibliographie published in Orientalia or the Register Assyriologie published
by Archiv für Orientforschung – their consultation remains tedious, leading to their
limited use. ARCHIBAB provides instant access to all reviews of a given work, as well
as to its corresponding review articles.
1.2.2.2 T :
heTexTs caTalogue
The next step will consist of gathering the complete text corpus. This table (“TEXTES”)
is, primarily, a catalogue containing the various kinds of descriptive elements, the
selection of which, retained for presentation, represent the questions ARCHIBAB hopes
to address. It is vital not to forget the lessons learned from the fancies of the 1970s,
when computerising information in a “neutral” manner was thought possible, and
that it would allow for answering unforeseen questions a posteriori. The ARCHIBAB
database was thus conceived, in the first instance, to follow a historical line of
questioning, even though other uses are doubtless possible.
The selected descriptive elements are the following:
- Support du texte (textual medium): Provides information relative to the medium
of the text: collection, nature of the medium (tablet and/or envelope, label, etc.),
museum number, acquisition or find-spot (grid number, locus and level, if the text is
from a documented excavation), dimensions, etc. In addition, the digital database was
conceived in such a way that it is able to deal with joins, in the case of texts
reconstructed from multiple fragments (which can be spread across multiple
collections).39
- Publications: Copy and/or photo, transcription, translation, and commentary. The
copy and the edition are most often found in different publications, although several
combinations are possible. The digital database has no limitations in this regard: a
link is established with all corresponding entries in the BIBLIOGRAPHIE table. The
37 This is not an exhaustive bibliography of Old Babylonian studies. Its focus is on archival texts
and is necessarily selective.
38 Providing the work station from which it is consulted has the appropriate subscriptions, if
the link is to limited-access sites such as JSTOR.
39 This is infrequent, but see for example AbB, 14 9 (AO 4318 from the Louvre, “virtually” joined
to L. 10934 from Istanbul).
3 The Historian and the Old Babylonian Archives 33
copies and/or photos are registered in the database,40 with source citation, allowing for
the analysis of the external characteristics of the documents (format, layout of the
text, etc.).
- Référence-clé (reference key): A single unit comprising a unique identifier of the
text, which can itself be designated in several ways: as a museum number, a copy, or
as different editions. The database is arranged in such a way that it will allow for a
text to be retrieved in all possible manners: AO 2704 (museum number), TCL 1 1 (copy),
VAB 6 37 (first edition) or AbB 14 1 (most recent edition).41 Thus, a reference key,
chosen when the data is entered, must be established (if only for sorting the lists)
and, in general, should correspond to the latest edition of the text (in this case AbB
14 1). This reference can easily be altered at a later point in time, since the links
between the tables is stabilised by the assignment of an arbitrary and invisible number
which is assigned by the program and cannot be modified.
- Résumé (summary): Free of input parameters, this should allow for quickly
apprehending the basics of the document.
- Type (text type): Sale, rental, adoption, or marriage, among others. Contrary to the
summary, the typology must be scrupulously defined. Determining a precise typology
(with a list of key words) has been one of the primary aims of this project.
- Objet(s) (object(s)): Child/adult/slave, field/orchard/house/prebend, and boat/
door, among others. The purpose of distinguishing text type from object is to allow
for the rapid assembly of documents dealing with slaves, houses, and so on. One may
thus indicate as many objects as necessary.
- Date: Day/month/king/year. One difficulty is that every reign has successive “year
names” for each sovereign, the chronological order of which is not always known.42
Attributing a numbered date (conventional if necessary) allows for documents to be
sorted chronologically. The program will also manage eponym dates (an Upper
Mesopotamian practice).
- Lieu de découverte et lieu de redaction (find spot and place of composition):
A distinction particularly relevant for letters, although not exclusively. This is also
relevant, for example, to receipts composed in Babylon, preserved in the merchants’
archives from Sippar.43 It is apposite, moreover, to instances of people moving: the
archives of a certain Amurrum-šemi were found in a house in Nippur, though a study
40 Access to certain visual documentation on the internet will only be possible observing proper
legal norms.
41 This will allow the user to find one’s way easily through the multiple re-editions of Mari texts,
for example ARM 14 26 (edition with copy in TCM 1 26) = LAPO 18 995 (translation) = FM 8 18 (with
photo in FM 8 p. 73).
42 The benefits of dating by regnal year number, practiced in Babylonia from the second half of
the second millennium, are obvious; recourse to a list of year names is not necessary for the dating
of the document. We must not forget the inconvenience of this practice: if the number is broken,
the date is forever lost, whereas a year formula that covers several lines leaves a greater possibility
for identification.
43 Charpin 1982, especially p. 38.
34 Dominique Charpin
of diplomatics has shown that most of these texts were written in places other than
Nippur.44 Unfortunately, two-thirds of the texts come from undocumented excavations,
illegal or ancient, where the finds were mostly not registered.45 In such cases,
determining the place of composition can be tricky. It must be noted that, apart from
rare exceptions, letters contain no indication of date or place of composition. In
addition, and unlike in the Neo-Babylonian period, contracts never indicate their place
of composition. A date allows for the delineation of a geographical region, where a
specific king exercised power at the time of the text’s composition (which can be very
limited in periods of political fragmentation). Such a specification requires a preserved
date and a known and attributed “year name” formula, which does not always exist.
Also of possible use is the oath, which often (but not always) includes the name of the
city deity and king. Lastly, topographical indications, onomastic data, and other such
elements, can limit the extent of the problem, but do not always solve it. This is also
the case with texts unearthed by looters on sites where controlled excavations have
taken place. In some instances the looters have preceded the archeologists;46 in others
they have followed.47 Needless to say, looters have also excavated sites that were never
subjected to controlled excavation.48 The task is, furthermore, much more difficult for
the Old Babylonian period than it is for the Neo-Sumerian and Neo-Babylonian periods,
because the number of sites that have yielded texts is much higher (more than fifty).49
Our process will allow us to establish a coefficient of uncertainty for suggested
locations.50
- Archives: Determining to which archive a text belongs. This is a continuation of the
process of determining the place of composition, described above. Even with controlled
excavations, precise indications for the provenance of a tablet are often missing,
whether because the information was never registered or later lost.51 Long experience
allows the scholar to reconstruct archival groups as they were likely discovered by
looters and later dispersed as they were sold. The term “dossiers/files” would seem
44 Charpin 1989, 109–12.
45 This figure is applicable if we exclude the archives from Mari. See the details in the appendix
to this contribution.
46 The British museum texts from Kisurra were acquired in 1898–99 (Goddeeris 2002, 94), while
the German excavations began in 1903.
47 This unfortunately took place at Meskene/Emar after the excavations of J.-Cl. Margueron in
1976. On the other hand, contrary to Dalley et al. 2005, 3, the pillage of Larsa predates, rather than
postdates, Parrot’s 1933 excavations (cf. Charpin 2007, 148).
48 Lagaba is such an example; see Charpin, Edzard and Stol 2004, 432 (add now the texts copied
in OECT 15).
49 See bibliography in Charpin, Edzard and Stol 2004, 407–80, where the sources are presented
according to 9 zones, as well as the appendix of the current article where they are quantified.
50 Following the model of The Helsinki Atlas of the Near East (Parpola and Porter 2001) and its
treatment of Neo-Assyrian toponyms.
51 Here we can cite the cases of Kisurra and Babylon, where many of the tags, which were attached
to tablets during the excavations of the Deutsche Orient Gesellschaft, were later lost. For Babylon,
see Pedersén 1998; also Pedersén 2005.
3 The Historian and the Old Babylonian Archives 35
more suitable for such groupings than “archives,” since doubts remain as to the exact
boundaries of these artificial sets – product of scholarly research that has relied heavily
on prosopographical analysis. Such adjustments usually appear in the reviews of major
series of edited texts.52 Henceforth, all of these preliminary endeavours should be
collected and completed.
Thanks to this catalogue, we will be able to call up, for example, the list of all of
the house sale texts from Larsa under Rîm-Sîn, effortlessly (by crossing the fields type,
objet (object), lieu (place) and date. Similarly, all of the adoption records may be
sorted chronologically, and all of the documents from the family archives of
Balmunamhe may be sorted chronologically or by type (text type). This represents a
significant transformation of research conditions.
1.2.2.3 T :
heTexTs TranscripTions
Gradually, the database will incorporate a complete transcription and translation of
each and every text.53 Transliterations may be entered line by line in a separate search
field, which is linked to the TEXTES field, and the reconstructed text becomes visible
in each TEXTES window. A coding system makes it possible to identify different parts
of the text. For a land sale contract, for example, the following are indicated: the
definition of property sold, survey, price, oath, and date, among others. This will enable
precise inquiries such as: Which oaths were found in the Larsa contracts during the
time of Hammu-rabi? And what were the blessing formulas in the letters found at Ur?
The collation of all of the originals is the ideal long-term outcome. In the meantime,
we must accept an intermediate stage during which we will give clear preference to
pragmatism rather than perfectionism. For now, the actions identified as pressing are
twofold:
- Incorporating texts from text series published within the last 20 years or so and
containing texts in facsimile (copy) only. These include: OECT 15 [2005; 381 texts]; VS
29 [2002; 132 texts]; OECT 13 [1991; 291 texts]; BBVOT 1 [1989; 176 texts]; SAOC 44
[1987; 97 texts]. These five series alone contain over 1,000 texts. Corrected transcriptions
of recent and reasonably well-edited texts will also be incorporated, such as: Edubba
1 [1992; 24 texts] and 7 [2000; 136 texts], AUCT 4 [1990; 101 texts] and 5 [2003; 276
texts], etc., more than 500 texts altogether. And, gradually, we will be able to go back
further in time and complete the series: YOS 12 [1979; 560 texts], YOS 13 [1972; 538
texts], YOS 14 [1978; 351 texts], etc.
- Incorporating published, isolated, and dispersed texts from compilations including
Festschrifts, conference proceedings, and journals of difficult access. Priority will be
52 See, for example, the review of YOS 13 by Stol 1973; of YOS 14 by Charpin 1979; of YOS 12 by
Charpin 1981; of Stone 1987 by Charpin 1989 and 1990; or of VS 29 by van Koppen 2003/4 and by
Charpin 2005c. The indications relative to archaeological context from the recently excavated tablets
from Sippar (Abu Habbah), published in Edubba 7, are also faulty (cf. Charpin 2005b, 152–63).
53 A summary will be sufficient for certain types of documents (especially for accounting records).
36 Dominique Charpin
given to publications that do not contain editions (tablet copies only), or that are very
old.
1.2.2.4 T :
heTexTs indices
The contents of the texts will then be indexed: Personal names, divine names,
geographical names, and vocabulary (especially titles). When possible, indexing will
occur directly after entering the transcription of the text.54
The recent book on local power in Mesopotamia during the Old Babylonian by A.
Seri55 is a good illustration of the present situation. The book contains a chapter on
the “mayor” (rabiânum), where one would have hoped to find a list of all of the rabiânum
attested in Old Babylonian documents, arranged by place and date. The author admits
that the dispersed condition of the sources, and the difficulty in accessing them,
discouraged her from this task.56 Such a tool will clearly be indispensable to the
scholarly community.
The project has been conceived in a way that will make the database ready to use
before its completion.57 Its priority will be to establish a complete catalogue of Old
Babylonian documents.
1.2.3. A SERIES OF MONOGRAPHS
Launching a new project that will take many years to complete is not enough: the
enthusiasm injected into the research presumes, likewise, the production of examples
of what has been achieved, illustrating the spirit with which this effort has been
undertaken and as preview of the results to come. In this vein, three well-defined
corpora will be published in monograph form, within the next three years. I have
already begun work on this project, and have submitted it to the ANR, where it has
received the necessary funding. The unity of these three sets is based on chronology;
all date to the last third of the reign of Samsu-iluna, the son and successor of Hammu-
rabi (1749–1712). These three publications will gather the texts known in a dispersed
manner, and will be completed by several dozen unedited ones.
Archibab 1: The daily life of a domain in Babylonia (based on the archives of Alammuš-nâṣir
from Damrum)
This book will be an edition and study of some 100 texts, from a northern Babylonian
54 It may come as a surprise that we intend to enter these in a semi-manual fashion. The idea
of an automatic prosopography seems, at present, dubious to me. A system of index cards is still
necessary to note useful information. Without this semi-manual entry system, the results will be
disconcertingly poor (much in the way current attempts at automatic lemmatisation have been).
55 Seri 2005.
56 “Despite my attempts to be thorough in compiling data, I am aware of the fact that some
attestations could have escaped my notice. One cannot but wait eagerly for the completion of the
Old Babylonian electronic corpus, because such a valuable tool will prevent omissions and make the
gathering of information easier” (p. 2). I have included a fair amount of the most obvious missing
ones in my review article (Charpin 2007, 167–82).
57 Indeed, one of the advantages of a digital database is its flexibility.
3 The Historian and the Old Babylonian Archives 37
city near Kiš, which we have identified as Damrum (HI.GARki). The texts were discovered
at the beginning of the twentieth century. They include a dozen letters that are in
Yale (AbB 9), one in the Vatican museum (IB 197), a few texts from the Louvre (TCL
17 and BBVOT 1), and the largest group of 55 unedited tablets in Chicago, which I
transcribed and photographed in May 2006.58 These archives are significant on several
levels. The majority of the texts are letters written by Alammuš-nâṣir to different
people, and in particular to a certain Nabi-Šamaš. The latter was the manager of the
estate to whom Alammuš-nâṣir habitually gave oral instructions. However, when
Alammuš-nâṣir had to leave for a few weeks on a trip to Sippar, he communicated his
instructions to him by means of writing. Allusions to missives sent, which appear in
many of the letters, allow for the chronological classification of the correspondence,
a very rare occurrence. This thereby constitutes an unparalleled corpus of documents,
presenting a picture of the management of an estate down to its most concrete details.59
Such details include milling, shearing, basket making (and the manufacture of many
other reed objects), brick moulding, compensation of daily labourers, and the treatment
of slaves. Important questions, such as what was the role of money and grain in
economic transactions, or what was the application of the code of Hammu-rabi, find
unanticipated answers here.60 These letters have been able to be located chronologically
thanks to the 40-plus administrative documents that come from the same archive and
are dated to years 19 and 20 of Samsu-iluna’s reign.
Archibab 2: An Isin neighbourhood from the Old Babylonian period
This set of archives was purchased in the 1920s, in part by the Louvre and in part by
the Nies Babylonian Collection of Yale University. Some of the texts have since been
published; I have been charged with publishing the rest.61 The most interesting group
concerns three generations of a family (the last member of which was Dadâ son of
Kubbulum), who over 56 years were prebend-holders.62 These texts represent a typical
example of the increasingly varied nature of archival documents toward the end of
the archive-period. In addition to property titles (mostly prebend purchases) there
are letters, loans, and different rental contracts, including for fields and plough teams.
Archibab 3: The nakkamtum storehouse of the Ebabbar in Sippar.
This set of texts deals with the operations of a storehouse (nakkamtum) of the temple
of Šamaš in Sippar during the final third of Samsu-iluna’s reign. The majority of the
58 I would like to thank W. Farber, curator of the Oriental Institute Collection, for letting me
complete this work under optimal conditions.
59 The lexical riches of these letters have provided many examples cited in the CAD.
60 See the letter A 3529, cited in translation by Roth 1995, 6.
61 I would like to thank B. André-Salvini, head of the department/general curator of the Antiquités
Orientales of the Louvre, and B. Foster, curator of the Yale Babylonian Collection, as well as U. Kasten,
the associate curator, who let me work on these tablets.
62 See my study Charpin 2000a, 200f.
38 Dominique Charpin
documents are unedited and housed at the Musée départemental des Antiquités in
Rouen, to which the abbé de Genouillac donated his personal collection. I have studied
and photographed these with the collaboration of J.-M. Durand. It is quite likely that
these tablets come from the excavations undertaken by Scheil at Abu Habbah in 1893.
They may have been given to Genouillac by the Sultan as a reward for his work at Kiš
(in 1911/12), as was common practice during the Ottoman Empire.63 These texts provide
material for the study of the administrative organisation of the Šamaš temple in
Sippar-Yahrurum. The documents mostly deal with livestock – big and small (shearing
of sheep, grain rations, registry of losses, etc.) – related to offerings made to the gods.
Other works
The work done on the electronic corpus will doubtless lead to the composition of
other monographs. We are anticipating publications of collaborative volumes resulting
from the preparation of the corpus in the Archibab series.
1.2.4 PERSPECTIVES
The reconstitution of these archives is an absolute imperative for these texts –
preserved, as they are, in such great numbers – to do full justice to their value as
usable historical documents. The digital database under construction will give direct
access to the documents for all who are interested in Old Babylonian history. This will
be useful not only to philologists, but also to historians (economic, social, political,
and of religion), lawyers, and archaeologists. In this way we hope to contribute to the
decompartmentalisation of Assyriology, a field that, by not developing the appropriate
tools, has too often erected the walls of its own confinement.
2. THREE CASE STUDIES
I would like to devote the second half of this contribution to the description of three
specific examples that illustrate how a quantitative approach to historical documents
leads to interesting results for the study of Old Babylonian history. First we will look
at the largest group of Old Babylonian texts obtained from controlled excavations,
namely, those found in the palace of Mari. Then we will examine a particular type of
text, i.e. loan documents, whose chronological distribution can, indirectly, help us
identify periods of crisis. We will end with the particularly interesting case of the real
estate “boom” at Larsa, during the first half of the reign of Rîm-Sîn.
63 This conclusion is confirmed by the presence of a tablet belonging to this same group, found
in the collection of the EPHE, assembled by Scheil himself (Durand 1981, 77, HE 484). The presence
of another text in the museum of Geneva is more difficult to explain (Birot 1969, 43).
3 The Historian and the Old Babylonian Archives 39
2.1 The archives from the Mari palace
We will begin by looking at the archives discovered in the Mari palace by A. Parrot
between 1934 and 1939.
2.1.1 PRESENTATION OF THE ARCHIVES
These archives are an excellent example of a “large corpus of documentary evidence.” The
total number of texts remains uncertain, because the catalogue established by M. Birot
and J.-M. Durand64 recorded both tablets and fragments. Hundreds of joins have been
made since, however, reducing the number of texts, some reconstituted from as many
as five or six fragments. If we take into account the number of fragments that have
not yet been joined, the texts amount to about 13,000 out of a generally given inventory
number of 20,000. At present, a little over 8,000 texts have been published in full,65
representing approximately 60% of the total. This is the largest number of archives
ever found in a single building. The palace at Nineveh, in comparison, has only
produced (not counting the texts belonging to the library) about 6,000 archival
documents.66
The typological distribution of the texts is interesting.67 It includes three categories:
epistolary, legal, and accounting documents.
- Letters have, since the beginning, attracted the most attention. They represent more
than 2,500 documents,68 or approximately one third of the 8,000 published texts.
- The legal documents are few in number.69 This can be explained by the fact that the
archives are palatial and contracts are usually found in family archives. Most of these
legal texts, moreover, form part of individual and family archives, which were most
likely not originally kept in the palace. Their presence there may, in some instances,
represent cases of confiscation.
- The accounting documents represent the largest portion of the archives. The term
“administrative documents,” moreover, which is often applied to them, is not entirely
correct, since a good number of letters also deal with administrative matters.
2.1.2 THE REPRESENTATIVENESS OF THE SAMPLES
Having described the richness of the Mari archives, the problem remains of what the
64 Cf. Birot 1978, 343.
65 This number is reliable to within a few digits (8,085 on 18 June 2008); it was produced by the
ARCHIBAB database from the bibliographical records entered at the beginning of the project. The
texts in question are those that are fully published; the texts that have only been the object of citation
(even long ones) have not been counted. This number corresponds to archival documents only. The
other categories of texts from Mari (“literary” texts, royal inscriptions, etc) are very limited in
number.
66 See the statistics compiled by Parpola 1986, 228.
67 For a presentation of the collected archives, see Charpin and Ziegler 2003, 1–27, complemented
by Charpin 2008c.
68 2,536 on 5 June 2008.
69 See most recently my contribution on “Les formulaires juridiques des contrats de Mari à
l’époque amorrite: entre tradition babylonienne et innovation” (Charpin 2010c).
40 Dominique Charpin
texts that have come down to us represent. The nature and scope of the sample
available to us should not be ignored when making use of the economic information
contained therein.
2.1.2.1. W B
haTThe aBylonianslefTBehind
What was found in the Mari palace is composed of what the Babylonians left there
before they destroyed it. And at the heart of the archives, we appreciate two sets of
circumstances. First, certain groups of tablets were not touched by the Babylonians.
This is the case for many of the accounting documents, especially the hundreds of
“king’s meals” texts found in open jars in Room 5 of the palace. These probably fell
from the storey above.70 It also appears that the archives from the women’s quarter
stayed intact. These were found in Rooms 52 and 110 and include accounting texts
and letters to the queen mother and to Zimrî-Lîm’s wives.71 In addition to this, Room
24 appears to have housed the archives of Iddin-Numušda, otherwise known as
Iddiyatum, chief of the merchants.
Second, another part of the archives was, however, sorted out. This is especially
true of the royal correspondence and is clear from a series of tags found in Room 115.72
A date between the 28th and 30th of month vii of the 32nd year of Hammu-rabi (1761)
is written on the reverse. The obverse indicates the contents: “Tablet basket/box
(=letters) of the servants of Samsî-Addu” (one example), or “tablet basket/box (=letters)
of the servants of Zimrî-Lîm” (six examples). This shows that, doubtless by relying on
pre-existing classifications, the Babylonians put the archives of the chancellery in
containers which they stored in Room 115. A fragment of a tag, however, and probably
belonging to one of the chests that was taken away, was found next to the palace gate.
It thus appears that the seven tags found correspond to seven cases that, for whatever
reason, were not taken out of the palace.73 The conclusion to be drawn from this is
clear: a portion of the original archives was no longer present in the ruins of the Mari
palace, most likely because it was taken to Babylon. This conclusion is corroborated
by internal analysis of the correspondence.74
A third situation is represented by the “dead archives.” These texts were already
discarded in antiquity and include the several hundred tablets from the reigns of kings
70 Charpin 2001b, 29.
71 Charpin 1995, 39; this article is available at www.digitorient.com/?attachment_id=112.
72 Charpin 1995.
73 I have calculated the weight and number of tablets stored in this kind of case. One case could
hold 450 letters, totalling 45 kg. An example of such a tablet-box was found at Tell ed-Dêr in the
house of Ur-Utu, the chief lamentation priest (Tanret 2008). It contained 207 tablets arranged in
four layers. The actual container, which was probably made out of reed, has disappeared, but the
tablets took up a space of 36 × 24 cm, the chest being about 20 cm deep. It was sturdy enough to
carry 23 kg, the weight of the 207 tablets found. My theoretical calculations for the Mari cases, which
were done before Tanret’s study, are exactly double, an amount that does not seem improbable to
me.
74 See Durand 1997, 28.
3 The Historian and the Old Babylonian Archives 41
Yahdun-Lîm and Sûmû-Yamam, found under the last occupation level of the palace,
particularly in the area of Rooms 133 to 142. They were used as backfill during the
construction carried out at the beginning of Yasmah-Addu’s reign. Some of the
accounting archives from the time of Yasmah-Addu are of the same status. These are
the several dozen oil expenditure records, found in Room 116, on a bench specifically
intended to support jars of oil.75
2.1.2.2 T
hreesamplesofaccounTingdocumenTs
In order to determine the value of the accounting document samples that are available
to us, I will present three examples of texts recording internal expenditure from the
Mari palace. These deal with sheep/goats, oil, and grain.
The first group contains 153 tablets describing incomes and expenditures of sheep.
These date to the first three months of Zimrî-Lîm’s reign, from 24–ix to 16–xii.76 Eleven
tablets record incomes of sheep in the care of Dabi’um, the animal fattener.77 137
tablets contain accounts of sheep expenditures for different occasions: the king’s table
(viz., for the consumption of the king and his entourage); oracular consultation;
sacrifices and various rituals; presents to the royal family, dignitaries, and foreign
envoys. Almost all of these tablets were sealed by the diviner Asqûdum.78 Altogether,
the small tablets account for 979 animals.79 ARM 7 224 provides us with a summary of
these expenditures, doubtless established at the end of the year.80 1,294 sheep were
thus expended under the responsibility of Asqûdum. This shows that over 150 texts
were written in less than three months. Using this total to calculate a number for the
13 years of Zimrî-Lîm’s reign shows that we should have 8,000 tablets for this type of
transaction alone. Around 5,200 sheep were expended every year, or 67,600 for the
total reign. A more detailed study of royal expenditures compared against the
husbandry activity of the entire kingdom is very much in order.81
A second example is found in the oil expenditure records. A particularly interesting
group of these was found in Room 79 of the palace.82 This group is composed of small
75 Charpin 1984; 1987.
76 See Charpin and Ziegler 2003, 172f.
77 Lafont 1984, 277–8.
78 Lafont 1984, 231–51.
79 Because of an absence of interest in the quantitative aspect of the file, this total has not been
calculated until now. I totalled the tablets from the list in Lafont 1984, 232–3. I counted 22 sheep in
ARM 23 264 (the total is broken but should be some 30 animals); in ARM 23 233 I counted 3, but
there must be more; the total in ARM 23 496 is missing.
80 Unlike the other texts in this lot, the record is not dated. See collations of the text in MARI 2,
p. 92. The total from ARM 7 224 probably corresponds to the total of expenditures since Zimrî-Lîm’s
arrival in Mari. It exceeds by 315 units the total resulting from the small accounts, which means
that we do not have all of these.
81 One should look at the figures from the sugâgûtum texts, recently published by Marti 2008.
82 Duponchel 1997. Although it was not pointed out in this study, two accounts of oil, from Room
79 had already been published. The tablets are long ration lists:
- The tablet known as AB: Birot 1953a; Birot 1953b; Birot 1955: A name list of oil rations distributed
42 Dominique Charpin
documents – recording oil expenditures over a period of three months during Zimrî-
Lîm’s first regnal year – along with three corresponding monthly account summaries.
It must be pointed out that jars were found in the adjoining Rooms 79 and 80 (as well
as in nearby Room 78). These were likely used to store the oil that was redistributed.
The rations were delivered in a regular manner to several specific groups: “the palace”
(ekallum), i.e., the women from the harem (350 to 382 women) along with the 15 guards;
254 men, the Bedouin guard of Mari and Ṣuprum, which was supervised by Ka’ala-AN;
51 servants of the apartments (ša temenni); 19 porters of the royal palanquin (ša nubalim);
and 16 guards who originated from Nuruggûm. We thus have 397 people from the
harem and 340 servants attached to the king, making a total of 737 people who received
oil rations every month. In addition to this, oil was irregularly distributed for such
purposes as offerings to the gods, lamps, vehicle maintenance, and for the care of
various people, among others. The tablet group found in Room 79 contains 106
individual accounts and 3 account summaries for a period of three months. If we
extrapolate from this information, we should have 5,700 such texts for the entire reign
of Zimrî-Lîm. From a quantitative point of view, the monthly sum of the expenditures
is more than 5 gur (about 600 litres),83 amounting to 7,200 litres a year. We can compare
this total with the one from a later document, ARM 22 276, an account of outgoing
sesame over a period of 28 months (from ix/ZL 2 to xii/ZL 4), under the responsibility
of Mukannišum. The document is a clearing of accounts (nipiṣ nikkassî), which took
place in the bît têrtim of the palace gate, under the control of three administrators,
on 2/v/ZL 5, four months after the period discussed. The general total of expenditures
is 283 ugar of sesame, which corresponds more or less to 283 gur of oil.84 The average
consumption for this period is therefore 1,212 litres of oil per month, which is double
to the men of the Bedouin guard of Mari and Ṣuprum, under the responsibility of Ka’ala-AN; to the
apartment servants (ša temenni); to the porters of the royal palanquin (ša nubalim); and to the guards
who originate from Nuruggûm (date: 30/xi/ZL 1 [Kahat]). The contents of this list reappear in the
account summary FM 3 95 1 “6”;
- Tablet known as C: Birot 1956, re-edited with joins as FM 4 3: A name list of oil rations distributed
to the 382 women and 15 doormen of the harem (date 1/xi/ZL 1 [Kahat]). The contents of this list
reappear in the account summary FM 3 95: 38´–42´ (30/xi/Zl 1 = Kahat), but the lines are almost
entirely broken and the reconstructions in FM 3 need to be revised (cf. Ziegler 1999, 23).
Also note that tablet FM 3 66 was already published by Birot 1972, 132f. (copy and transliteration).
A similar tablet (T.340), but discovered under the floor of Room 142, was recently published by
Chambon 2008; it probably dates to the month iii/ZL 2 (Ah Purattim). It differs in that it is an account
of expenditures both of oil and tallow. Lastly, unedited accounts of oil from Rooms 69 and 74, dating
to the “Kahat” year, were cited by Birot 1972, 133. These illustrate once again the problem of the
“disorder” of the archives found in the palace, due, in part, to registration errors that occurred at
the time of discovery of the archives (Charpin and Durand 1986, 147 and, more recently, Lacambre
1997, 93 n. 6). A clearer picture of the situation will be possible only when all of the documentation
has been published.
83 The number in FM 3 60: 64 is broken, but partially legible on the photo. In FM 3 95: 1´ shows
at least 3 gur, but the number is also broken.
84 The relationship between the quantity of oil produced and the amount of sesame necessary
for its production is 10 %, as demonstrated by Chambon 2008 (cf. n. 82).
3 The Historian and the Old Babylonian Archives 43
what we calculated above from the small texts, from the beginning of Zimrî-Lîm’s
reign. This is also consonant with the development of palatial consumption between
these two periods.85
The two cases just presented are analogous; the documentation is (almost) complete,
covers a short period of time, and was under the authority of “bureaux” in charge of
accounting for sheep expenditures and the distribution of oil rations respectively.86
The fact that both cases date to the beginning of Zimrî-Lîm’s reign suggests that these
were discarded documents. However, the excavation procedures of 1934–39 were not
sophisticated enough to recognise this. The “bureaux” managed the internal everyday
expenditures of the palace. They dealt with commodities such as grain, oil, wool,
animals, alcoholic beverages, copper, and bronze.87 If we extrapolate the results
obtained above, then each bureau would have produced around 7,000 tablets during
the reign of Zimrî-Lîm. The number of these bureaux is unknown, but we can estimate
that there were at least six. This leads to the conclusion that the internal accounting
of expenditures yielded 42,000 tablets, begging the question: why have these not
reached us? One explanation is the practice of recycling tablets. After having composed
account summaries, the scribes no longer needed to store the small accounts and they
recycled the clay to make new tablets.88
A third group of tablets, recording grain expenditures destined for the “meal of the
king” (naptan šarrim),89 differs from the cases described above. These accounts were
recorded daily by two female scribes attached to the palace kitchens.90 Account
summaries were drawn up at the end of every month. These texts were first studied
on a lexical level, contributing to the study of food and diet.91 We were also able to
draw conclusions about royal sociability, since the king invited distinguished guests
but also certain soldiers to his table.92 If we estimate that one tablet was written per
day,93 then we should have a total of 4,700 texts, excluding account summaries. What
85 N. Ziegler was able to calculate that the number of women in the harem (350 at the beginning
of Zimrî-Lîm’s reign) was double in Year 6 of Zimrî-Lîm (Ziegler 1999, 18).
86 This notion of “bureau” is undoubtedly a modern simplification, as was shown by Chambon
2008. Nonetheless, it appears that the head of the sheep “bureau” was the diviner Asqûdum (cf. the
presence of his seal and the account summary ARM 7 224: 14), whereas the head of the oil “bureau”
was Šubnalû (FM 3, p. 205 based on FM 3 60, 65–6).
87 Here, too, we are dealing with small tablets and large account summaries. See the study by
Lacambre 1997.
88 For an overview see Faivre 1995. For a concrete example from the reign of Yahdun-Lîm, see
Charpin and Ziegler 2003, 36, end of note 49 (jar from square E).
89 It must be noted that such texts are in no way particular to Mari. For similar texts dating to
the reign of Rîm-Sîn of Larsa, see Beckman 1995, 2 n. 14. Such texts were also present in the homes
of notables (naptan awîlim “meal of the man”): cf. Charpin 2003, 314.
90 For these two women, see Ziegler 1999, 91f. and 106.
91 See Bottéro 1957, 256–68; Birot 1960, 274–295; Burke 1963; Birot 1964; Durand 1983, 166–80.
92 See Lafont 1985.
93 There are several cases where we have two tablets written for the same day. These were
probably written for the morning and evening meals (cf. Sasson 1982, 328).
44 Dominique Charpin
has come into our possession, however, is far short of this number. Once the sequence
of Zimrî-Lîm year names was established,94 we organised the texts into chronological
order and realised that these accounted for a large part of his reign, with several
periods for which there were no texts. The intervals simply correspond to times when
the king was absent from the palace. We were thereby able to establish the periods
of time when the king was on campaign.95
There were, to be sure, accounting documents other than the ones recording daily
expenditures, such as inventories of precious crockery.96 In addition, a separate
accounting was kept for gifts received and given during the king’s travels. The records
were brought back to the palace upon the king’s return. These small accounting
documents have allowed us to reconstruct the king’s military campaigns. The
documents are important for reducing the risk of distortion prominent in the
interpretation of commemorative inscriptions. They allow for a more precise
reconstruction of the king’s itinerary.97
2.1.2.3 T -
hemiksum TaxcollecTion
Tax collection registers provide a good indicator of economic activity for all periods.
While account summaries dealing with this activity were not found in the Mari palace,
another group of documents is noteworthy. These are not accounting documents but
letters, which have contributed significantly to the study of economic history. One
group of 45 letters, for example, discusses the collection of the miksum, contributing
to the discussion of Euphrates trade. These short notes were written by Numušda-
nahrari, an official posted at Terqa, 75 km upstream from Mari.98 The messages are
addressed to Iddiyatum, the “chief of the merchants” of Mari. They specify whether
or not the contents of a boat had been subjected to a tax known as miksum, which was
levied on commodities going to market.99 The following are two examples:100
“Say to Iddiyatum: thus (speaks) Numušda-nahrari. Six shekels of silver were
levied as miksum-tax on Sumuqân-išar’s oil cargo: let (him) pass! 24/iii.”
“Say to Iddiyatum: thus (speaks) Numušda-nahrari. There is a cargo belonging
to Summân which has not been inspected nor subjected to the miksum-levy:
impose the miksum-levy! 25/iv.”
94 See most recently Charpin and Ziegler 2003, 257–62.
95 See Charpin and Ziegler 2003, 195 n. 204; 199 n. 249; 201 n. 269 and 275; 207 n. 343; 235 n. 612;
240 n. 676.
96 Guichard 2005.
97 Villard 1986; Villard 1992; Charpin 1994.
98 See Durand 2000, nos. 862–905.
99 See Michel 1996. We also have tablets which record levied sheep as the miksum-tax of the
Suteans during the reign of Yahdun-Lîm (cf. Charpin 2001b, 23–7).
100 ARM 13 91 (= LAPO 18 871) et ARM 13 95 (= LAPO 18 875).
3 The Historian and the Old Babylonian Archives 45
These short notes cover the period of nine months from 2/ix to 28/v of the following
year.101 We should therefore be in possession of 800 such documents for the entire
reign of Zimrî-Lîm. The lingering question is whether the extrapolation of such samples
can be used to calculate the volume of river-borne commercial activity. Such an
endeavour may be premature.
2.1.3. FORECASTS AND VERIFICATION
C. Wilcke has suggested that writing developed more to allow for “accounting
forecasts”102 than for the more commonly believed purpose of a posteriori verification
or control. This is particularly clear in the Ur III period. In the case of the Mari palace
archives,103 most of the accounting documents record expenditures.104 It must be
pointed out, however, that once a list of rations was established, it served to make
forecasts for the next distribution. A particularly clear example of this occurs in a list
of rations for the harem women. The scribe erased the date of the tablet and re-dated
it to the following month.105 The record was reused because the ration distribution
did not change from one month to the next. This illustrates the difficulty of drawing
a clear line of demarcation between these two purposes.
The letters of Yasîm-Sûmû, the “minister of finance/chief accountant” (šandabakkum)
reveal clear economic forecasts.106 We do not have the corresponding texts, however,
because his archives have yet to be found. We only have the letters he wrote to Zimrî-
Lîm.107 Yasîm-Sûmû played a role in decisions concerning the calendar, the key element
in accounting control and in making forecasts.108
The question that arises, then, is whether or not account verification took place.
J. Sasson has not found evidence of this in the records concerning the “king’s meals.”109
He explained the frequent discrepancies between the daily records and summary
accounts by assuming that it was often difficult for the scribes to find the original
records, and that in such cases they would feel little hesitation in fabricating data, to
the point of re-writing fake “originals”. I must admit that I find this explanation
difficult to accept. J. Sasson is insistent on the fact that the “king’s meals” tablets were
found in five different rooms: Rooms 5, 69, 79, 110, 111 (we can also add 160). We know,
however, that there was some confusion during the excavation. In 1934, more than
13,000 documents were found by Parrot, who was excavating with 300 workmen and
only one area supervisor, one photographer, and an interpreter (no epigrapher).
101 Zimrî-Lîm year 12 and 13; see Charpin and Ziegler 2003, 235 n. 612.
102 Wilcke 1970, 166.
103 See Ziegler 2001.
104 We do not have accounting records of commodities coming into the palace. These may be in
a part of the palace that has not been excavated, the area of the “Nergal gate” (cf. Durand 1987, 48).
105 Ziegler 1999, 23.
106 See Maul 1997.
107 See especially the letter ARM 13 35 = LAPO 18 858.
108 Charpin and Durand 2004.
109 Sasson 1982.
46 Dominique Charpin
Moreover, the distribution of the tablets during the excavation represents the final
state of things and not necessarily what prevailed some years earlier. In fact, we know
of several cases where the scribe composed an account statement with a group of
tablets before him, as evidenced by a document concerning the collection of arrears.110
Yet, while the explanation given by J. Sasson is not entirely convincing, it is also
difficult to contest. In a recent study of two account summaries of oil expenditures
(T. 340 and ARM 22 276), G. Chambon came to a similar conclusion; he was struck by
the precision of the totals and suspected that the scribe performed a posteriori
calculations.
The “census” (têbibtum) texts clearly fit into the “(accounting) forecast” category.
These are lists of men of fighting age, established locally and then compiled at three
provincial capitals (Mari, Terqa, and Saggarâtum). They were then recopied onto large
tablets that were sent to the capital.111 From these lists, the king could know how many
men were available for future military campaigns. We know that these lists were kept
with great care in the palace, in sealed chests,112 and that great care was involved in
their consultation.113 We thus have concrete proof that these texts were used. Certain
documents compare the actual number of men mobilised with the theoretical number
of men expected;114 in some instances the absentee rate is 60 %! It clear, then, that
these “forecast” documents were used as instruments for verification.
2.2 Debt: an indicator of economic activity?
“Loans” are the most frequent type of legal documents.115 The principal question
relevant to them is what information they provide regarding economic activity.116
Their chronological organisation is, therefore, a priori a crucial tool for analysis. One
must be cautious when looking at the samples that have come into our possession.
Usually the tablet kept by the creditor was destroyed when the debt had been settled.
The loan documents we have must therefore represent debts which had never been
repaid. My study, which focuses mainly on the reigns of Hammu-rabi and Samsu-iluna,
shows that the level of loan documents increased as a date scheduled for debt remission
by royal decree (mîšarum) approached.117 The loan documents cancelled by these edicts,
although no longer of any value, were often kept by the creditor instead of being
destroyed. This allows us to see that the remission of debt, decided by the sovereign,
110 Charpin 2008b (cf. Charpin 2007, 149).
111 These lists were studied by A. Millet Albà 2001.
112 See the tablet-basket labels published in Charpin 2001b, 16–18.
113 See the letters ARM 10 82 (= LAPO 18 1205) and ARM 13 14 (= LAPO 17 652), glossed in Charpin
2001b, 14f.
114 See ARM 23 428 and 429, with comments by D. Soubeyran (see Bardet et al. 1984, 358–368).
The historical context is now better understood: see Charpin and Ziegler 2003, 224 n. 499.
115 Unfortunately, the book by Skaist 1994 does not provide numbers for the corpus that is the
object of his study.
116 Van de Mieroop 2002.
117 Charpin 2000a.
3 The Historian and the Old Babylonian Archives 47
was a welcome occasion. Even if the majority of the loans were incurred in the months
preceding the mîšarum, it also appears that loans could go unpaid and date back several
years.
In the time since the aforementioned study was published, several new elements
have come to light that substantiate its general conclusion. Newly published collections
of tablets as well as unedited texts confirm the existence of this phenomenon, possibly
for periods beyond what I limited myself to as essential. These collections include:
- The publication of a group of tablets from Sippar concerning the application of the
mîšarum during Samsu-iluna year 8.118 These have the advantage of having been found
in a well-defined archeological context.
- Unedited texts from Tell Egraineh.119 These form a group of 31 loan documents dating
to the end of Ammi-ditana’s reign, apparently cancelled following the mîšarum
proclaimed at the accession of Ammi-ṣaduqa. This group illustrates how the temple
was affected by these measures in the same way “private” creditors were.120
- Information from unedited texts from the archives of Ur-Utu found at Tell ed-Dêr.
This attests to the application of the mîšarum at the accession of Ammi-ṣaduqa.121
- A recent article looking at the loan documents from the reign of Samsu-iluna,
including unedited texts known from catalogues of the British Museum and Yale.122
While the corpus has quadrupled, from 130 to 560 texts, the chronological distribution
remains identical. There is an element of comfort to this, showing, as it does, that
even with a relatively limited sample, we were able to obtain dependable results.
Stemming from how the documents were preserved, the chronological distribution
of loan contracts reflects the actual situation only in an indirect manner. The number
of loans not repaid increases with the approach of a mîšarum, because these debts
were cancelled by the king. However, the king must have proclaimed a mîšarum because
an economic catastrophe prevented the poorest from paying their debts.123
2.3 The real estate boom under Rîm-Sîn
Unfortunately, the great majority of published Old Babylonian texts from Larsa have
come from the illicit excavations of the early 20th century. Looking at the chronological
distribution of the corpus of urban land sales, one is struck by an anomaly:
118 Al-Rawi and Dalley 2000; see my remarks on the subject in Charpin 2005b, especially pp.
154–157, which clarifies and complements my previous observations in Charpin 2001a.
119 Kessler 1997/98; see my note on the subject (Charpin 2001a).
120 Contrary to what was stated by Richardson 2002, 231: “a mîšarum would have no authority
to remit loans issued under temple authority”.
121 Van Lerberghe 2003, especially p. 72f. and fig. 4.3 (p. 63). The author gives the impression
(pp. 72–3) that there is a direct link between the economic situation and the number of loans, without
taking into account that we have no knowledge of the number of loans, only the number of loans
not reimbursed; the formulation on p. 75, on the other hand, is correct.
122 Suurmeijer 2006/7.
123 One of the clearest economic crises is the one that led Samsu-iluna to proclaim a mîšarum in
the 28th year of his reign: see Charpin, Edzard and Stol 2004, 359 n. 1875.
48
Dominique
Charpin
Fig. 3.1 The chronological distribution of urban land sales
3 The Historian and the Old Babylonian Archives 49
The graph (fig. 3.1) above shows the distribution over a century, from 1840 (accession
of Sîn-iqîšam) to 1744 (Samsu-iluna Year 6). The number of property purchases in
Larsa is very high under Sîn-iqîšam, Warad-Sîn (with its peak during Year 9) and in
the first part of Rîm-Sîn’s reign. It subsequently becomes considerably lower: 92% of
the contracts pre-date the 32nd year of Rîm-Sîn. There are no indications of judicial
changes, however, neither during the middle of Rîm-Sîn’s reign, nor at the time of the
Hammu-rabi’s Babylonian conquest (1763). This phenomenon has long remained
unexplained. The number of contracts, more than 60, is large enough to rule out
coincidence. The sample, coming from several archives, is significant. The work done
on the site of Larsa from 1985 to 1989 has thus led me to venture an explanation.124
Archaeological research has shown that the entire northern part of the tell was
occupied by large houses (from 500 m2 to more than 1,000 m2), standing in the middle
of vacant plots, which we assume were gardens. These reveal an aspect of Mesopotamian
urbanism very different from that uncovered by excavations at Ur, Nippur, and at
smaller sites such as Šaduppûm or Harrâdum, characterised by small, closely-packed
houses. In this neighbourhood of Larsa, by contrast, we are dealing with “small palaces”
of a sort, where the members of the elite reproduced, on a reduced scale, the palatial
constructions of the period.125
In light of these archaeological finds, it has been possible to take another look at
the documents unearthed by looters from this quarter in the beginning of the 20th
century. And we have deduced that over a period of a few decades members of several
prominent families systematically bought land parcels adjoining the lots they owned.
When the head of the family died, the heirs divided, among other property, the large
house, which was what the father had presumably erected on the large parcel of land
he had pieced together. The chronological evolution of Larsa’s real estate activities
thus becomes clear: the upsurge in lot purchases came to a sudden halt in the middle
of Rîm-Sîn’s reign, because the available parcels in Larsa’s “residential” quarter had
been purchased and amassed into larger lots for larger houses. These families of
notables experienced a period of rapid economic growth during the reign of Warad-
Sîn and the first half of Rîm-Sîn’s. The construction of a beautiful “mansion” was the
social symbol of their achievement. This is reinforced by the fact that the contracts
do not reveal economic activity related to real estate investment.
3. CONCLUSION
These three cases were presented here because they represent particularly clear
examples of both the wealth and limits of the Old Babylonian documentation from
which we will write new pages of the economic and social history of Mesopotamia in
the first half of the second millennium BCE. Much remains to be done to this end, and
it is the ARCHIBAB project’s ambition to contribute to this endeavour.
124 Here I summarise the conclusions of my previous study (Charpin 2003).
125 Battini and Calvet 2003.
50 Dominique Charpin
I know not how to end this article other than by drawing attention to the disastrous
effects the damage of the illicit excavations in Iraq since 1991 will have on the
continuation of this research. I admit to not being an Assyriologist who rejoices over
having new and additional tablets. Taking these out of context largely deprives them
of potential value for those interested in economic history. It takes a particularly
stubborn philologist not to understand this fact…
4. APPENDIX: OLD BABYLONIAN TEXTS FROM CONTROLLED EXCAVATIONS
I have tried to indicate the number of Old Babylonian archival texts that have come
from controlled excavations.126 These represent about half of the total (as many as
29,228). The situations vary, however. We know very little about the archaeological
context in which the archives were found for many excavations that took place prior
to 1914 (in some cases for later ones as well…). In these cases, the only advantage we
have over texts unearthed by illicit excavations is that the provenance is assured.127 I
have thus only included texts that come from what I refer to as “documented
excavations.” Not only are these from controlled sites, but they were registered with
a minimum of care. The total amounts to slightly higher than 15,000.
It must be pointed out that the Mari archives distort the statistics because of their
great number (more than 8,000 published texts). Setting these aside, we see that of
the 21,000 published texts, only 7,000 are from documented excavations. Two thirds
of the archival texts published to date (apart from Mari), from both controlled and
illicit excavations, are therefore lacking an archaeological context. This reveals the
difficulty of the task at hand.
N.B. The following list refers to the bibliography of Charpin, Edzard and Stol 2004,
403–480. Certain sites are not included (such as Lagaba, Ṣupur-Šubula, etc.) because
the texts come from illicit excavations. The + sign precedes entries which are not in
the aforementioned bibliography.
1. T s
he umeriansouTh
1.1. Ur (tell Muqqayair): 1,059
1.2. Uruk (Warka): 564
1.3. Larsa (tell Senkereh): 141
1.4. Lagaš
– Lagaš (al-Hiba): 6
– Girsu (Tello): 18
126 Here, I take up again the geographical distribution of the bibliography found in Charpin,
Edzard and Stol 2004, 403–80, where I did not include the number of texts. Naturally, the numbers
here are approximate: they only take into account published texts.
127 Unfortunately, these are often dispersed over several collections. The texts excavated at
Nippur in the 19th century provide a good example of this, where the tablets are located in Istanbul,
Philadelphia and Jena.
3 The Historian and the Old Babylonian Archives 51
1.5. Kutalla (tell Sifr): 106
Total for the 6 sites: 1,894
2. T
hecenTre
2.1. Nippur (Nuffar)
The texts from the end of the 19th century excavations are devoid of any
archaeological context (and sometimes not identified as such in the
museum collections).
– since 1948: 507
2.2. Isin (Išān Baḥrīat): 128
2.3. Kisurra (Abu Hatab): 212
2.4. Adab (Bismaya): 71
Total for the 4 sites: 918
3. T
henorTh
3.1. Babylon: 112
3.2. Kiš: unfortunately the texts excavated by the French in 1911–12 (90
texts from archives found in PRAK 1 and 2, preserved in Istanbul [siglum
Ki] or in the Louvre) or from the Anglo-American excavations between
the two wars (Chicago/Oxford) were published without any reference to
context (various articles by Langdon; OECT 13 and 15). We cannot
reconstitute these archives, therefore the texts were not included.
3.3. Sippar
– Sippar-Yahrurum (Abu Habbah): 93
– Sippar-Amnânum (Tell ed-Dēr): 436
Many towns for which we were able to establish a provenance are only
known from archival texts which come from illicit excavations: Dilbat,
Lagaba, etc.
Total for the 4 sites: 641
4. T d
he iyalaBasin
4.2. Ešnunna (Tell Asmar): 55
4.3. Nêrebtum (Ishchali): 135
4.4. Tutub (Khafajah): 111
4.5. Šaduppûm (Tell Harmal): 143
4.6. Uzarlulu (Dhib‘ai): 5
4.+ Tulul Khattab: 36
4.9.1. Mê-Turan (Tell Ḥaddad and Tell es-Sib): 169
Total for the 7 sites: 654
52 Dominique Charpin
5. s e
usaand lam
5.1. Suse (Shush): 826
6. u m
pper esopoTamia
6.1. Nineveh: 7
6.2. Šušarra (Shemshāra): 246
6.+ Nuzi (Yorghan Tepe): 1
6.3. Qaṭṭarâ (Tell Rimah): 335
6.3.1 Tell Taya (= Zamiyatum?): 1
6.4. Tell Hawa (= Razamâ of Yussân?): 1
6.6. Šehnâ/Šubat-Enlil (Tell Leilan): 335
6.8. Chagar Bazar (Ašnakkum): 334
Total for the 8 sites: 1,260
7. T m -e
he iddle uphraTes
7.1. Tell Shishin: 7
7.2. Harrâdum (Khirbet ed-Diniye): 116
7.3. Mari (Tell Hariri): 8,085
7.4. Terqa (Tell Ashara): 13
7.5. Tuttul (Tell Bi‘a): 379
7.6. Imâr/Emar (Meskene): 1
Total for the 6 sites: 8,601
8. W s
esTern yria
8.1. Alalah (Tell Atchana): 268
8.2. Ebla (Tell Mardikh): 2
Total for the 2 sites: 270
9. p
alesTine
9.1. Haṣor: 1
9.2. Hebron: 1
Total for all sites: 15,066
3 The Historian and the Old Babylonian Archives 53
Afterword
My French contribution has been translated by E. Salgues and revised by H. Baker; my
gratitude goes to both of them. I have left my text (and the statistics it contains) as
submitted in November 2008, only updating the bibliography when necessary. The
French version can be downloaded at http://www.digitorient.com/?p=190.128
BIBLIOGRAPHICAL ABBREVIATIONS
Abbreviations generally follow CAD and Archiv für Orientforschung 48/49 pp. 311ff. Note
furthermore the following sigla and abbreviations:
BDTNS Database of Neo-Sumerian Texts (http://bdts.filol.csic.es/, accessed August 2010).
ETCSL Electronic Text Corpus of Sumerian Literature (http://etcsl.orinst.ox.ac.uk/, accessed
August 2010)
OBTC Old Babylonian Text Corpus (http://www.klinopis.cz/, accessed August 2010)
OECT 15 see Dalley et al. 2005
SEAL Sources of Early Akkadian Literature (http://www.seal.uni-leipzig.de/, accessed
August 2010)
REFERENCES
Al-Rawi, F. N. H. and Dalley, S. (2000) Old Babylonian Texts from Private Houses at Abu Habbah,
Ancient Sippir. Baghdad University Excavations (Edubba 7). London: NABU Publications.
Battini, L. and Calvet, Y. (2003) Construction royale, construction privée: la maison B 59 de
Larsa. Iraq 65, 131–141.
Bardet, G., Joannès, F., Lafont, B., Soubeyran, D. and Villard, P. (1984) Archives administratives de
Mari I (Archives Royales de Mari 23). Paris: Éditions Recherche sur les Civilisations.
Beckman, G. (1995) Old Babylonian Archival Texts in the Nies Babylonian Collection. Catalogue of the
Babylonian Collections at Yale 2. Bethesda, MD: CDL Press.
Beckman, G. (2000) Old Babylonian Archival Texts in the Yale Babylonian Collection. Catalogue of the
Babylonian Collections at Yale 4. Bethesda, MD: CDL Press.
128 The reader will find supplementary information in:
Charpin, D. (2010 [2011]) Les nouvelles technologies au service de l’historien de la
Mésopotamie: le projet “ARCHIBAB.” Comptes rendus de l’Académie des Inscriptions et Belles
Lettres 2010 [2011], 1381–1394.
Charpin, D. (in press) The Assyriologist and the Computer: the “Archibab” Project. Hebrew
Bible and Ancient Israel 4 (due 2014).
Jacquet, A. (2013) Family Archives in Mesopotamia during the Old Babylonian Period. In
M. Faraguna (ed.), Legal Documents in Ancient Societies IV. Archives and Archival Documents
in Ancient Societies. Trieste 30 September-1 October 2011, 63–85. Trieste: Edizioni Università
di Trieste.
54 Dominique Charpin
Birot, M. (1953a) Trois textes économiques de Mari (I). Revue d’Assyriologie 47, 121–130.
Birot, M. (1953b) Trois textes économiques de Mari (I). Revue d’Assyriologie 47, 161–174.
Birot, M. (1955) Trois textes économiques de Mari (II). Revue d’Assyriologie 49, 15–31.
Birot, M. (1956) Textes économiques de Mari (IV). Revue d’Assyriologie 50, 57–72.
Birot, M. (1960) Textes administratifs de la salle 5 du palais (Archives Royales de Mari 9). Paris: P.
Geuthner.
Birot, M. (1964) Textes administratifs de la salle 5 du palais (2° partie) (Archives Royales de Mari 12).
Paris: P. Geuthner.
Birot, M. (1969) Tablettes économiques et administratives d’époque babylonienne ancienne conservées
au Musée d’art et d’histoire de Genève. Paris: P. Geuthner.
Birot, M. (1972) Simaḫlânê, roi de Kurda. Revue d’Assyriologie 66, 131–139.
Birot, M. (1978) Données nouvelles sur la chronologie du règne de Zimri-Lim. Syria 55, 333–343.
Bottéro, J. (1957) Textes économiques et administratifs (Archives Royales de Mari 7). Paris: P.
Geuthner.
Brosius, M. (ed.) (2003) Ancient Archives and Archival Traditions. Concepts of Record Keeping in the
Ancient World. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Burke, M. L. (1963) Textes administratifs de la salle 111 du palais (Archives Royales de Mari 11).
Paris: P. Geuthner.
Chambon, G. (2008) Un nouveau récapitulatif sur la gestion de l’huile à Mari. In D. Bonatz, R.
M. Czichon and F. J. Kreppner (eds) Fundstellen. Gesammelte Schriften zur Archäologie und
Geschichte Altvorderasiens ad honorem Hartmut Kühne, 283–297. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz.
Charpin, D. (1979) Review of YOS 14. Bibliotheca Orientalis 36, 188–200.
Charpin, D. (1981) Review of YOS 12. Bibliotheca Orientalis 38, 517–547.
Charpin, D. (1982) Marchands du palais et marchands du temple à la fin de la I° dynastie de
Babylone. Journal Asiatique 270, 25–65 [accessible at www.digitorient.com/?p=98].
Charpin, D. (1984) Nouveaux documents du bureau de l’huile à l’époque assyrienne. MARI 3,
83–126.
Charpin, D. (1986) Transmission des titres de propriété et constitution des archives privées en
Babylonie ancienne. In Veenhof (ed.), 121–140.
Charpin, D. (1987) Nouveaux documents du bureau de l’huile (suite). MARI 5, 597–599.
Charpin, D. (1989) Un quartier de Nippur et le problème des écoles à l’époque paléo-babylonienne.
Revue d’Assyriologie 83, 97–112.
Charpin, D. (1990) Un quartier de Nippur et le problème des écoles à l’époque paléo-babylonienne
(suite). Revue d’Assyriologie 84, 1–16.
Charpin, D. (1993) Review of AUCT 4. Revue d’Assyriologie 87, 185–187.
Charpin, D. (1994) Une campagne de Yahdun-Lîm en Haute-Mésopotamie. In D. Charpin and
J.-M. Durand (eds) Florilegium Marianum II: recueil d’études à la mémoire de Maurice Birot, 177–200
(Mémoires de N.A.B.U. 3). Paris: SEPOA.
Charpin, D. (1995) La fin des archives dans le palais de Mari. Revue d’Assyriologie 89, 29–40.
Charpin, D. (2000a) Les prêteurs et le palais: les édits de mîšarum des rois de Babylone et leurs
traces dans les archives privées. In A. C. V. M. Bongenaar (ed.) Interdependency of Institutions
and Private Entrepreneurs. MOS Studies 2. Proceedings of the Second MOS Symposium (Leiden 1998),
185–211 (PIHANS 87). Leiden: Nederlands Historisch-Archaeologisch Instituut te Istanbul.
Charpin, D. (2000b) Lettres et procès paléo-babyloniens. In F. Joannès (ed.) Rendre la justice en
Mésopotamie, 69–111. Paris [accessible at www.digitorient.com/?attachment_id=114]
Charpin, D. (2001a) Les prêteurs et le palais (suite). Nouvelles Assyriologiques Brèves et Utilitaires
2001/51.
3 The Historian and the Old Babylonian Archives 55
Charpin, D. (2001b) L’archivage des tablettes dans le palais de Mari: nouvelles données. In W.
H. van Soldt, J. G. Dercksen, N. J. C. Kouwenberg and Th. J. H. Krispijn (eds) Veenhof Anniversary
Volume. Studies Presented to Klaas R. Veenhof on the Occasion of his Sixty-Fifth Birthday, 13–30
(PIHANS 89). Leiden: Nederlands Historisch-Archaeologisch Instituut te Istanbul.
Charpin, D. (2003) La politique immobilière des marchands de Larsa à la lumière des découvertes
épigraphiques de 1987 et 1989. In J.-L. Huot (ed.) Larsa, travaux de 1987 et 1989, 311–322
(Bibliothèque archéologique et historique 165). Beirut: Institut français d’archéologie du
Proche-Orient (available at www.digitorient.com/?attachment_id=91).
Charpin, D. (2005a) Données nouvelles sur la vie économique et sociale de l’époque paléo-
babylonienne. Orientalia 74, 409–421.
Charpin, D. (2005b) Économie et société à Sippar et en Babylonie du nord à l’époque paléo-
babylonienne. Revue d’Assyriologie 99, 133–176.
Charpin, D. (2005c) Review of VS 29. Revue d’Assyriologie 99, 133–152.
Charpin, D. (2006) Les inscriptions royales suméro-akkadiennes d’époque paléo-babyloniennes.
Revue d’Assyriologie 100, 131–160.
Charpin, D. (2007) Chroniques bibliographiques 10. Économie, société et institutions paléo-
babyloniennes: nouvelles sources, nouvelles approaches. Revue d’Assyriologie 101, 147–182.
Charpin, D. (2008a) Lire et écrire à Babylone. Paris: Presses universitaires de France.
Charpin, D. (2008b) Archivage et classification: un récapitulatif de créances à Mari sous Zimrî-
Lîm. In R. D. Biggs, J. Myers and M. T. Roth (eds) Proceedings of the 51st Rencontre Assyriologique
Internationale held at the Oriental Institute of the University of Chicago July 18-22, 2005, 1–13 (SAOC
62). Chicago: Oriental Institute.
Charpin, D. (2008c) “Tell Hariri - Mari (Textes) … II. Les archives”. In L. Pirot et al. (eds) Dictionnaire
de la Bible, Supplément vol. 14, fasc. 77–78 (Taršiš–Tell Hariri), col. 233–248. Paris: Letouzey
& Ané.
Charpin, D. (2010a) Writing, Law and Kingship: Essays on Old Babylonian Mesopotamia. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Charpin, D. (2010b) Reading and Writing in Babylon. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Charpin, D. (2010c) Formulaires des contrats de Mari à l’époque amorrite: entre tradition
babylonienne et innovation. In S. Démare-Lafont and A. Lemaire (eds) Trois millénaires de
formulaires juridiques, 13–42 (Hautes Études Orientales 48). Geneva: Droz.
Charpin, D. (2012) L’exercice du pouvoir par les rois de la Ière dynastie de Babylone: problèmes
de méthode. In G. Wilhelm (ed.) Organization, Representation, and Symbols of Power in the Ancient
Near East. Proceedings of the 54th Rencontre Assyriologique at Würzburg, 20–25 July 2008, 21–32.
Winona Lake, IN: Eisenbrauns.
Charpin, D. and Durand, J.-M. (1986) apud J. Margueron, Quelques remarques concernant les
archives retrouvées dans le palais de Mari. In Veenhof (ed.), 141–152.
Charpin, D. and Durand, J.-M. (2004) Yasîm-Sûmû et les noms d’années de Zimrî-Lîm. Nouvelles
Assyriologiques Brèves et Utilitaires 2004/76.
Charpin, D., Edzard, D. O. and Stol, M. (2004) Mesopotamien: Die altbabylonische Zeit (Orbis Biblicus
et Orientalis 160/4). Fribourg/Göttingen: Academic Press/Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht.
Charpin, D. and Ziegler, N. (2003) Florilegium Marianum V. Mari et le Proche-Orient à l’époque amorrite:
essai d’histoire politique. Paris: SEPOA.
Dalley, S., Robson, E. and Breckwoldt, T. (2005) Old Babylonian Texts in the Ashmolean Museum,
mainly from Larsa, Sippir, Kish, and Lagaba (Oxford Editions of Cuneiform Texts 15). Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
56 Dominique Charpin
Dombradi, E. (1996) Die Darstellung des Rechtsaustrags in den altbabylonischen Prozessurkunden
(Freiburger Altorientalische Studien 20/1). Stuttgart: Franz Steiner Verlag.
van Driel, G. (1994) Private or Not-so-private: Nippur Ur III Files. In H. Gasche, M. Tanret, C.
Janssen and A. Degraeve (eds) Cinquante-deux réflexions sur le Proche-Orient ancien offertes en
hommage à Léon De Meyer, 181–195 (Mesopotamian History and Environment, Occasional
Publications 2). Leuven: Peeters.
Duponchel, D. (1997) Les comptes d’huile du palais de Mari datés de l’année de Kahat. In D.
Charpin and J.-M. Durand (eds) Florilegium Marianum III: Recueil d’études à la mémoire de Marie-
Thérèse Barrelet, 201–262. Paris: SEPOA.
Durand, J.-M. (1981) Documents cunéiformes de la IVe Section de l’Ecole pratique des Hautes études.
Tome I: Catalogue et copies cunéiforme (Hautes Études Orientales 14). Paris: Droz.
Durand, J.-M. (1983) Textes administratifs des salles 134 et 160 du palais de Mari (Archives Royales
de Mari 21). Paris: P. Geuthner.
Durand, J.-M. (1987) L’organisation de l’espace dans le palais de Mari. In E. Lévy (ed.) Le système
palatial en Orient, en Grèce et à Rome. Actes du Colloque de Strasbourg, 19-22 juin 1985, 39–110 (Travaux
du Centre de recherche sur le Proche-Orient et la Grèce antiques 9). Strasbourg: Brill.
Durand, J.-M. (1997) Les Documents épistolaires du palais de Mari, Vol. I (Littératures anciennes du
Proche-Orient 16). Paris: les Éditions du Cerf.
Durand, J.-M. (2000) Les Documents épistolaires du palais de Mari, Vol. III (Littératures anciennes
du Proche-Orient 18). Paris: les Éditions du Cerf.
Faivre, X. (1995) Le recyclage des tablettes cunéiformes. Revue d’Assyriologie 89, 57–66.
Figulla, H. H. (1961) Catalogue of the Babylonian tablets in the British Museum, Volume I. London:
British Museum.
Frayne, D. R. (1990) Old Babylonian Period (2003–1595 BC) (Royal Inscriptions of Mesopotamia, Early
Periods 4). Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
Goddeeris, A. (2002) An adoption document from the Kisurra collection in the British Museum.
In C. Wunsch (ed.) Mining the Archives. Festschrift for Christopher Walker on the Occasion of His
60th Birthday, 93–98 (Babylonische Archive 1). Dresden: ISLET.
Guichard, M. (2005) La Vaisselle de luxe des rois de Mari (Archives Royales de Mari 31). Paris:
Éditions Recherche sur les Civilisations.
Joannès, F. (ed.) (1995) Les phénomènes de fin d’archives en Mésopotamie. Revue d’Assyriologie
89, 1–147.
Jursa, M. (2005) Neo-Babylonian Legal and Administrative Documents. Typology, Contents and Archives
(Guides to the Mesopotamian Textual Record 1). Münster: Ugarit-Verlag.
Kessler, K. (1997/98) Das spätaltbabylonische Tempelarchiv vom Tell Egraineh. Archiv für
Orientforschung 44/45, 131–133.
van Koppen, F. (2003/4) Review of VS 29. Archiv für Orientforschung 50, 379–392.
Lacambre, D. (1997) La gestion du bronze dans le palais de Mari: collations et joints à ARMT
XXII. In D. Charpin and J.-M. Durand (eds) Florilegium Marianum III: Recueil d’études à la mémoire
de Marie-Thérèse Barrelet, 91–123. Paris: SEPOA.
Lafont, B. (1984) Chapter 3 (texts nos. 246–427). In Bardet et al., 227–326.
Lafont, B. (1985) Le ṣâbum du roi de Mari au temps de Yasmah-Addu. In J.-M. Durand and J. R.
Kupper (eds) Miscellanea Babylonica. Mélanges Offerts à Maurice Birot, 161–179. Paris: Éditions
Recherche sur les Civilisations.
Marti, L. (2008) Florilegium Marianum X. Nomades et sédentaires à Mari: la perception de la taxe-
sugâgûtum. Paris: SEPOA.
3 The Historian and the Old Babylonian Archives 57
Maul, S. M. (1997) Zwischen Sparmaßnahme und Revolte… Die Aktivitäten des Iasīm-Sūmû, des
šandabakkum von Mari. MARI 8, 755–774.
Michel, C. (1996) Le commerce dans les textes de Mari. In J.-M. Durand (ed.), Amurru 1. Mari,
Ébla et les Hourrites: dix ans de travaux, 385–426. Paris: Éditions recherche sur les civilisations.
Millet Albà, A. (2001) La population du royaume de Mari à l’époque du roi Zimrî-Lîm d’après les archives
du palais de Mari. EPHE. Unpublished PhD thesis, Paris.
Oppenheim, A. L. (1967) Letters from Mesopotamia. Chicago/London: University of Chicago Press.
Parpola, S. (1986) The royal archives of Nineveh. In Veenhof (ed.), 223–236.
Parpola, S. and Porter, M. (2001) The Helsinki Atlas of the Near East in the Neo-Assyrian Period.
Chebeague Island, ME/Helsinki: Casco Bay Assyriological Institute/The Neo-Assyrian Text Corpus
Project.
Pedersén, O. (1998) Zu den altbabylonischen Archiven aus Babylon. Altorientalische Forschungen
25, 328–338.
Pedersén, O. (2005) Archive und Bibliotheken in Babylon. Die Tontafeln der Grabung Robert Koldeweys
1899–1917 (Abhandlungen der Deutschen Orient-Gesellschaft 25). Saarwellingen: SDV.
Renger, J. (1977) Cooperation internationale – Berlin. Akkadica 5, 26–28.
Richardson, S. (2002) Ewe Should Be So Lucky. In: C. Wunsch (ed.) Mining the Archives. Festschrift
for Christopher Walker on the Occasion of His 60th Birthday, 229–244 (Babylonische Archive 1).
Dresden: ISLET.
Roth, M. (1995) Law Collections from Mesopotamia and Asia Minor (SBL Writings from the Ancient
World Series 6). Atlanta, GA: Scholars Press.
Sasson, J. M. (1982) Accounting discrepancies in the Mari NÌ.GUB [NÍG.DU] texts. In G. van Driel
et al. (eds) Zikir šumim. Assyriological Studies Presented to F.R. Kraus, 326–341. Leiden: Brill.
Schorr, M. (1913) Urkunden des Altbabylonischen Zivil- und Prozessrechts (Vorderasiatische Bibliothek
5). Leipzig: Hinrichs.
Seri, A. (2005) Local Power in Old Babylonian Mesopotamia. London: Equinox.
Sigrist, M. (1990) Old Babylonian Account Texts in the Horn Archaeological Museum (Andrews
University Cuneiform Texts 4). Berrien Springs, MI: Andrews University Press.
Sigrist, M. (2003) Old Babylonian Account Texts in the Horn Archaeological Museum (Andrews
University Cuneiform Texts 5). Berrien Springs, MI: Andrews University Press.
Sigrist, M., Figulla, H. H. and Walker, C. B. F. (1996) Catalogue of the Babylonian tablets in the British
Museum. Volume II. London: British Museum Press.
Sigrist, M., Zadok, R. and Walker, C. B. F. (2006) Catalogue of the Babylonian Tablets in the British
Museum. Volume III. London: British Museum Press.
Skaist, A. (1994) The Old Babylonian Loan Contract. Its History and Geography. Bar-Ilan Studies in Near
Eastern Languages and Culture. Ramat Gan: Bar-Ilan University Press.
Stol, M. (1973) Review of YOS 13. Journal of Cuneiform Studies 25, 215–233.
Stone, E. (1987) Nippur Neighborhoods (Studies in Ancient Oriental Civilization 44). Chicago:
Oriental Institute of the University of Chicago.
Stone, E. (2002) The Ur III–Old Babylonian Transition: an Archaeological Perspective. Iraq 64,
79–84.
Suurmeijer, G. (2006/7) Loans and Edicts. A Quantitative Analysis of the Temporal Distribution
of Loan Documents and Royal Edicts under the Reign of Samsu-iluna. Jaarbericht Ex Oriente
Lux 40, 104–119.
Tanret, M. (2004) The Works and the Days ... On Scribal Activity in Old Babylonian Sippar-
Amnānum. Revue d’Assyriologie 98, 33–62.
58 Dominique Charpin
Tanret, M. (2008) Find the Tablet-box… New Aspects of Archive-Keeping in Old Babylonian
Sippar-Amnānum. In R. van der Spek (ed.) Studies in Ancient Near Eastern World View and Society
Presented to Marten Stol, 131–147. Bethesda, MD: CDL Press.
Tanret, M., Janssen, C. and Dekiere, L. (forthcoming) Chains of Transmission: a search through Ur-
Utu’s property titles (Mesopotamian History and Environment, Memoirs 2). Ghent: University
of Ghent.
Tunca, Ö. and Baghdo, A. (eds) (2008) Chagar Bazar (Syrie) III. Les trouvailles épigraphiques et
sigillographiques du chantier I (2000-2002) (A.P.H.A.O., Publications de la Mission archéologique
de l’Université de Liège en Syrie). Louvain: Peeters.
Van de Mieroop, M. (2002) Credit as a Facilitator of Exchange in Old Babylonian Mesopotamia.
In M. Hudson and M. Van de Mieroop (eds) Debt and Economic Renewal in the Ancient Near East,
163–173 (International Scholars Conference on Ancient Near Eastern Economies 3). Bethesda,
MD: CDL Press.
Van Lerberghe, K. (2003) Private and Public: The Ur-Utu Archive at Sippar-Amnānum (Tell ed-
Dēr). In M. Brosius (ed.), 59–77.
Van Lerberghe, K. and Voet, G. (1991) On ‘Quasi-Hüllentafeln’. Northern Akkad Project Reports 6,
3–8.
Veenhof, K. R. (ed.) (1986) Cuneiform Archives and Libraries. Papers read at the 30e Rencontre
Assyriologique Internationale, Leiden, 4-8 July 1983 (PIHANS 57). Leiden: Nederlands Historisch-
Archaeologisch Instituut te Istanbul.
Villard, P. (1986) Un roi de Mari à Ugarit. Ugarit–Forschungen 18, 387–412.
Villard, P. (1992) Le déplacement des trésors royaux d’après les archives royales de Mari. In D.
Charpin and F. Joannès (eds) La circulation des biens, des personnes et des idées dans le Proche-
Orient ancien, 195–205 (CRRAI 38). Paris: Éditions Recherche sur les Civilisations.
Wilcke, C. (1970) Review of Oppenheim 1967. Zeitschrift für Assyriologie 60, 165–167.
Ziegler, N. (1999) Florilegium Marianum IV. Le Harem de Zimrî-Lîm. La population féminine des palais
d’après les archives royales de Mari. Paris: SEPOA.
Ziegler, N. (2001) Gestion et contrôle d’après les archives du palais de Mari (XVIII° siècle av.
J.-C.). Ktèma 26, 63–72.

# FIGURE

# BIBLIOGRAPHY

