# METADATA
author: Hasselbach‐Andee R.
source_id:Hasselbach-Andee2020_Multilingu
title: Multilingualism And Diglossia In The Ancient Near East
Year: 2020
Source_ID:  Hasselbach-Andee2020_Multilingu
Source_Type:  Article in Book: A Companion to Ancient Near Eastern Languages, First Edition. 
John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Source_Role,Step_distance: 0,1,2 ,3,4 
Pages: 457-470 (ch24)
Web: 
Publisher:John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

# TEXT

CHAPTER TWENTY-FOUR
Multilingualism and Diglossia in the Ancient Near East

Rebecca Hasselbach‐Andee


Introduction

It has long been noticed by linguists, anthropologists, and sociologists that bi‐ or multi-
lingualism is not, as usually perceived by many people who grew up in Western countries
such as the US and many European countries, a minority phenomenon but rather a daily
D
necessity for the majority of the world’s population (Romaine 2003, 512; Schendl 2014,
521). In the majority of today’s countries, bilingualism or even multilingualism is an
essential part of how thEe society and speech communities function. These multilingual
societies arise through various factors, such as trade, marriage, education, and political or
religious reasonsS. As true as it is for today’s countries and societies that the use of two or
more languages represents the majority situation, the same can be said about ancient soci-
eties. Human communities have always been in contact with each other (Romaine 2003,
I
513–514), which has led to evidence of language contact and bi‐ or multilingualism from
V
the earliest attestations that we have for human language in writing.
A few words need to be said about bi‐ and multilingualism and the problems faced
E
when investigating these features in ancient societies before turning to examples from the
Ancient Near East. “Bilingualism” generally means the alternate use of and proficiency in
Rtwo languages (Langslow 2002, 26; Weinreich 1968, 1), while “multilingualism” refers to
the use of more than two languages or linguistic varieties. In this article, the term “multi-
lingualism” is preferred over “bilingualism” because it is less restrictive regarding the
number of languages concerned and allows for more flexibility in describing multilingual
societies. “Proficiency” has been variously defined and is often understood as the ability to
speak different languages with the same degree of fluency, although some scholars also
simply consider less than native‐speaker fluency in both languages as sufficient for calling
A Companion to Ancient Near Eastern Languages, First Edition. Edited by Rebecca Hasselbach-Andee.
© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2020 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
0004541074.INDD 457 1/21/2020 4:13:04 PM
458 Rebecca Hasselbach‐Andee
an individual bi‐ or multilingual. It has to be noted, however, that in reality, multilingual
individuals are hardly ever equally fluent in the languages they know. This is due to the
fact that individuals or certain population groups in situations in which multilingualism
is widespread, hardly ever use the same languages for the same functions (Romaine 2003,
512). It is often the case that a language or language register is only appropriate for cer-
tain situations, such as the use of one language among family and friends, while another
S
is used in education, for formal purposes such as dealings with the government, at the
work place, or for religious purposes. Language choice in multilinguals is thus not arbi-
trary but is determined by social factors (Romaine 2003, 517). Given Fthe functional dif-
ferentiation between the linguistic varieties spoken by a multilingual, the individual will
be more fluent in a given variety according to the domains Ofor which the language is
used, while using a variety in an unusual domain can lead to interference, that is, influ-
ence from the variety that is usually used for that domain (Romaine 2003, 525). For
O
example, an individual who is accustomed to speak one language at home and with
friends but uses another language at work, might experience interference such as includ-
ing specialized vocabulary from the latter languRage when speaking about his or her work
in the language more commonly used for the communication with family and friends.
Consequently, proficiency most commonly does not mean equal fluency in two or more
P
languages, but rather proficiency in each language in certain domains of use, that is, dif-
ferent situational contexts.
When the choice which language to use in specific situations becomes institutionalized
at the societal level, we speak ofD “diglossia” (Romaine 2003, 519). The concept of diglos-
sia was first introduced by C. Ferguson (Ferguson 1959; see also Ferguson 1991).
Ferguson defined diglossia as a special sociolinguistic situation in which two varieties of
E
the same language are used for different functions (Ferguson 1959, 325). The functional
domains of each variety, which Ferguson calls H = High variety and L = Low variety based
S
on their prestige, are divided into L being used for informal situations, such as among
family and friends, for informal conversations, and folk literature, while H is used for for-
mal situations sIuch as education and the government, in writing, the news, etc. Important
V
to note is also that L in these situations is the native language of each speaker while H has
to be formally learned. Lastly, L is commonly not written and has no standard variant,
wEhile H is the language of a significant body of literature and thus has a written standard
(Ferguson 1959, 329‐331). Examples given by Ferguson include Arabic, Modern Greek,
and the language situation in Switzerland.
R
Ferguson’s definition of diglossia has subsequently been broadened to include situa-
tions in which two or more different languages instead of varieties of the same language
show an institutionalized functional distribution (see especially Fishman 1967). Today,
scholars use various definitions of the term diglossia. Some adhere to the stricter definition
given by Ferguson, while others apply the term to any situation in which two or more
linguistic varieties are used for different domains. The different approaches taken with
regard to the definition of the term are one reason why there is often no consensus regard-
ing whether or not a given situation should be interpreted as diglossic. Varying definitions
of the term can also be observed in the discussions of linguistic situations in the Ancient
Near East, as will be shown further below, where they equally lead to rather different
interpretations of the data.
0004541074.INDD 458 1/21/2020 4:13:04 PM
Multilingualism and Diglossia in the Ancient Near East 459
Besides these general issues regarding the definition of certain terms, another problem
faced when dealing with the question of multilingualism and diglossia in ancient societies
in particular is the lack of data. As everybody working on ancient or dead languages
knows, we are limited to the evidence that has been preserved in written form with regard
to what we can say about the language or languages used. This differs greatly from mod-
ern situations where linguists have access to spoken varieties and are able to observe the
S
choice of language and the extralinguistic reasons for a switch in language or language
register. For ancient languages it is important to be aware that we are lacking this direct
evidence and to carefully distinguish between written and spoken mulFtilingualism.
Written records do not tell us how people actually spoke, they only tell us how they
wrote and what type of standards they used in writing (VersOteegh 2002, 57). Similarly,
linguistic changes reflected in writing, which can be either historical changes or changes
within language registers, only provide us with insights concerning the attitudes of a
O
respective speech community or author towards the grammar and style that was deemed
acceptable in writing, and not necessarily with evidence of changes in the spoken form of
the language. In other words, the linguistic chaRnges witnessed in writing do not necessar-
ily reflect changes that occurred in the spoken language at the same time. It is well known
that it can take quite some time before a linguistic change in the spoken language becomes
P
acceptable for the written standard (Versteegh 2002, 59, 66). Similarly, attempts at lan-
guage maintenance can obscure the actual influence of one language on another in its
written form. The problem with writt en evidence is thus that there is a danger of overrat-
ing the evidentiary value of wDritten texts in terms of spoken language use and to assume
that it represents how people actually spoke or how spoken language developed. Because
of these restrictions in the available data, we have to be aware that what we can trace with
E
our evidence primarily reflects written multilingualism in the Ancient Near East and we
have to keep in mind that the spoken reality might have been rather different. The actual
S
speech situations can, if at all, only be deduced by indirect evidence such as occasional
mistakes, slips of the pen, hypercorrections, loanwords, etc. (Versteegh 2002, 53).
Lastly, we ofIten lack knowledge about the circumstances of the attested texts, that is, their
V
sociolinguistic background. In many cases, it is difficult to determine why an author used
one language over another or switched between languages since the extralinguistic informa-
tEion on social parameters that determine language use is lacking (Schendl 2014, 526).
R
Multilingualism in the Ancient Near East
With these preliminary remarks in mind, it is possible to turn to the evidence for multilin-
gualism and diglossia in Ancient Near Eastern societies. There is plenty of evidence that
ancient societies were similar to modern ones in that multilingualism rather than mono-
lingualism was more common, if not the norm. We know that Ancient Near Eastern peo-
ples and cultures were in contact with each other continuously based on archaeological
and textual evidence for trade connections, migrations, and contact between adjacent
political entities and cultures.
Written evidence throughout the Ancient Near East provides us with plenty of informa-
tion about multilingual societies and/or population groups, including, for example, the at
0004541074.INDD 459 1/21/2020 4:13:04 PM
460 Rebecca Hasselbach‐Andee
least bilingual contact between Akkadian and Sumerian in Mesopotamia, the co‐existence
of various languages such as Hittite, Hurrian, Luwian, and Hattic, among others, in
Anatolia – texts in each of these languages were found in the capital of the Hittite empire
Hattuša (see also chapter 12) –, the multilingual situation that has been discovered in
Ugarit, where texts in several languages, including Ugaritic, Akkadian, Sumerian, Hittite,
Hurrian, and Egyptian were found (Pardee 2004, 289), the close contact between Hebrew
S
and Aramaic in the Levant starting during the Biblical period and lasting until the death of
Hebrew as a spoken language in the first two centuries of the common era (see also chap.
23), the close contact of Akkadian and Aramaic that ultimately led to lFanguage shift, that
is, the replacement of Akkadian by Aramaic as a spoken language, and the multilingual situ-
ation in Greco–Roman Egypt, where Greek, Egyptian (CopticO and Demotic), and, to a
certain degree, Latin are attested in writing, with other minor languages including Nubian,
Carian, and Aramaic (see e.g. Fewster 2002, 224), to name just a few. These examples,
O
although they are far from being comprehensive, are nevertheless representative and show
the complexity of Ancient Near Eastern societies from a linguistic point of view. We have
to keep in mind, however, that all the aforemeRntioned examples point towards written
multilingualism and do not necessarily indicate that the spoken reality was the same.
In the following, this contribution will look at some of the evidence for multilingualism
P
in the Ancient Near East in more detail:
Multilingualism in Mesopotamia
D
In Mesopotamia, multiculturalism and with it multilingualism was the norm. The open-
ness of Mesopotamia in terms of cultural diversity has, besides common factors such as
E
migrations, two main reasons: first, the large lowland basin of the Tigris‐Euphrates river
valley has no geographic borders, that is, no barriers such as high mountains or the like
S
that hinder access, and second, Mesopotamia is poor in natural resources, which is a fact
that favors economic, political, and cultural contacts with peoples and societies outside of
Mesopotamia (IGalter 1995, 25). Because of this situation, two or more languages were
V
spoken in Mesopotamia during most of the historical periods that we can trace. In the
following, this article will first look at the multilingual situation of the third and early
seEcond millennium BCE, which primarily concerns the use of Sumerian and Akkadian, and
then turn to the situation attested in the first millennium BCE, which provides evidence for
Akkadian and Aramaic bilingualism.
R
Sumerian and Akkadian
Sumerian and Akkadian bilingualism goes back at least to the early third millennium BCE.
When exactly the contact between the two languages started is unknown since it is uncer-
tain when Semitic speaking people migrated into Mesopotamia. Although there is no
direct evidence from the early to mid‐third millennium BCE for Akkadian in the form of
texts, it is clear that there was a Semitic speaking presence that was in close contact with
Sumerian speakers in southern Mesopotamia since unilingual Sumerian texts that were
composed in Fara and Abu Salabikh during the Early Dynastic III period often contain
scribal names that are of Semitic origin (see e.g. Biggs 1967, 104, 57; Krebernik 1998,
0004541074.INDD 460 1/21/2020 4:13:04 PM
Multilingualism and Diglossia in the Ancient Near East 461
265). Furthermore, at the time when monolingual Akkadian texts start to be written,
around 2350 BCE, the changes in the language that can be attributed to Sumerian influ-
ence are already completed or at least have started to appear, such as the change in word
order from VSO to SOV (completed), the loss of the five typical Semitic guttural pho-
nemes /ˀ/, /h/, /ḥ/, /ˁ/, /ġ/ (in progress), the presence of Sumerian loanwords in
Akkadian and vice versa, etc. (see e.g. Zólyomi 2011, 397). The presence of these interfer-
S
ence phenomena from Sumerian in the earliest written Akkadian texts indicates that the
contact between the two languages, and thus bilingualism involving the two, must have
started considerably earlier than the appearance of the first fully writteFn Akkadian texts.
As in many other cases of ancient languages, there is no direct evidence how this bilin-
gualism was realized in practice. We do know that in the first hOalf of the third millennium
BCE, Sumerian was the language used for writing, for example for administrative pur-
poses, given that all economic and administrative transactions were recorded in Sumerian,
O
and that it was the language of cultural prestige. Akkadian, at this early stage, was not
used for writing, at least not explicitly, as far as we can tell. What percentage of the popu-
lation of Mesopotamia were native speakers ofR Sumerian or Akkadian – was the majority
of the Akkadian‐speaking population bilingual or just a small educated part? – and how
the interaction between the two languages happened, that is, among which population
P
groups, is impossible to know. Scholars such as Galter (1995) and Vanstiphout (1999)
have nevertheless tried to draw some conclusions about how this early bilingualism was
realized based on comparisons with p eripheral cultures such as Ebla. In particular, they
have looked at the existence, Dor lack thereof, of certain types of text genres, including
bilingual lexical lists and bilingual texts, and noted that the earliest bilingual lexical lists
do not originate in Mesopotamia proper but were found at Ebla. It further seems that the
E
first true bilingual texts likewise come from Ebla (Vanstiphout (1999, 147). The Ebla
material dates to approximately 2370–2320 BCE, while the first real Akkadian‐Sumerian
S
bilingual texts from Mesopotamia start to appear around 1900 BCE (Vanstiphout 1999,
148; see also chapter 21), after Sumerian declined as a spoken language. There is further
evidence thatI the earliest attestations for professional “translators” between Akkadian
V
and Sumerian appear during the Sargonic period, when, for the first time, Akkadian was
used as an administrative language (Vanstiphout 1999, 147). The question is why the
aEttested types of text genres differ in Ebla and Mesopotamia proper. Galter and
Vanstiphout have suggested that the degree of bilingualism and proficiency in the respec-
tive languages (Akkadian and Sumerian in Mesopotamia, Eblaite and Sumerian at Ebla)
R
differed. Both of them assume that the extent of bilingualism in Mesopotamia, at least
among the scribal elite during Early Dynastic times, made translations from one language
into the other unnecessary (Vanstiphout 1999, 151; Galter 1995, 27). In other words,
native Akkadian‐speaking scribes learned Sumerian and Sumerian writing in the same way
as Sumerians and were equally proficient in both Akkadian and Sumerian. In Ebla, how-
ever, Sumerian was a foreign language and thus tools such as bilingual lexical lists and
texts were created for teaching purposes (Galter 1995, 27). Only with the rise of Akkadian
as the predominantly spoken and then written language and the decline of Sumerian in
Mesopotamia, which led to the ultimate demise of Sumerian as a spoken language, was it
felt necessary to create similar devices in Mesopotamia. Although this idea requires fur-
ther proof, it provides an interesting explanation for the chronological difference in the
0004541074.INDD 461 1/21/2020 4:13:04 PM
462 Rebecca Hasselbach‐Andee
emergence of genres such as bi‐ or multilingual lexical lists and bilingual texts in
Mesopotamia proper and its western periphery. If Galter and Vanstiphout are correct, the
initial bilingualism in Mesopotamia of at least the scribal elite must have exhibited near
equal proficiency in both languages. Only with the loss of Sumerian as a spoken language
and language of administration did this proficiency decline in favor of Akkadian, so that
Sumerian had to be studied as a foreign language with the help of certain educational
S
tools, as was the case in Ebla centuries earlier.
Based on the evidence presented above it thus seems that at least the scribes who were
native speakers of Akkadian were highly proficient in Sumerian as welFl and were able to
switch easily from one language to the other, making translations unnecessary. Whether
this high proficiency of native Akkadian speakers permeated thOe majority of the Akkadian
language community or not is difficult to assess since there are no sources that address the
issue. It is likely, however, that some larger part of the Akkadian language community had
O
at least some knowledge of Sumerian because of the significant influence that Sumerian
had on Akkadian. As mentioned above, the loss of the typical Semitic guttural phonemes
/ˀ/, /h/, /ḥ/, /ˁ/, and /ġ/ are usually attribRuted to Sumerian influence. The typical
Semitic word order VSO, which is still attested in some early Akkadian names, changed to
SOV, also under Sumerian influence. Some morphemes such as the ventive ending –am
P
might have changed their function based on parallel morphemes in Sumerian. Last not
least, there is a significant amount of Sumerian loanwords in Akkadian. Changes such as
these, especially the structural changes that pervaded all dialects of Akkadian, can hardly
be explained by solely originatDing in scribal schools. They are easier explained based on
larger groups of native Akkadian speakers that were proficient, at least to a certain degree,
in Sumerian as well. It is thus likely that, besides scribes, at least local elites and maybe
E
even some parts of the general population had proficiency in both Akkadian and Sumerian.
It is more difficult to determine the degree of proficiency of native Sumerian speakers in
S
Akkadian. Sumerian has a number of Akkadian loanwords, but it is not as easy to identify
comparable structural changes based on contact with Akkadian as they are found in the
latter (see also Ichapter 21). It could thus be speculated that initially the attested bilingual-
V
ism was stronger in one direction, native Akkadian speakers adopting Sumerian, than the
other way round. This situation changed, however, when Akkadian became the major
spEoken and written language of Mesopotamia starting during the Sargonic period. With
the rise of Akkadian, Sumerian speakers adopted Akkadian as their main language with the
result that Sumerian died out as a spoken language around the late third/early second
R
millennium BCE.
The Second Millennium BCE
The linguistic situation in Mesopotamia continued to change after the end of the third
millennium BCE. The ongoing changes were caused by several factors, including migra-
tions and political and economic contacts. At the beginning of the second millennium BCE,
multiple languages were written and spoken in southern Mesopotamia, including Sumerian
(as literary language), Akkadian, Hurrian, Elamite, and Amorite (Crisostomo 2015, 162).
In the second half of the second millennium BCE, Kassite was added to the mix while
Amorite disappeared. There is no evidence to what degree Amorite was spoken in
0004541074.INDD 462 1/21/2020 4:13:04 PM
Multilingualism and Diglossia in the Ancient Near East 463
Mesopotamia during the first half of the second millennium BCE since there are no texts in
this language and it hardly left any traces in Akkadian itself. It seems, therefore, that the
Amorite population quickly assimilated into the existing Mesopotamian culture and gave
up their own language within a few generations. A similar situation is attested with regard
to Kassite, which entered Mesopotamia during the Middle Babylonian period (approxi-
mately 1500–1000 BCE) and equally left hardly any traces in the written sources.
S
Regarding Sumerian and Akkadian, Akkadian, as mentioned before, had become the
primary spoken language in Mesopotamia and was also used for all types of writing, while
Sumerian was restricted to certain literary genres such as magical incFantations, liturgy, a
few specific administrative documents, and education – in fact scribal education was always
conducted in Sumerian (Crisostomo 2015, 162). O
In the late second millennium and early first millennium BCE, Aramaic speakers began
to migrate into Mesopotamia and brought their language with them. The bilingual situa-
O
tion between Akkadian and Aramaic during the first millennium BCE will be discussed in
more detail in the following section.
R
Akkadian and Aramaic
P
During the first millennium BCE, Arameans increasingly started to enter Mesopotamia and
to have contact with Assyria and Babylonia. The migrations were in part voluntary, that is,
they followed the pattern witnessed in previous migrations into Mesopotamia involving
groups such as Akkadian speakDers and Amorites, and in part they were forced. When the
Neo Assyrian Empire expanded westward, its policies included the resettlement of con-
quered population groups, resulting in the resettlement of Aramaic speakers from con-
E
quered Aramean kingdoms into Assyria (Pitard 1994, 213, 227). Furthermore, the relative
open borders of Assyria promoted trade and other forms of contact with neighboring
S
cultures, which equally brought it into direct contact with speakers of Aramaic. Due to
these circumstances, we can witness a growing number of West Semitic, including Aramaic
names, amongI the personal names attested in the Mesopotamian textual material from the
V
beginning of the first millennium BCE on (Tadmor 1987, 449; Gzella 2015, 107). The use
of Aramaic in Mesopotamia continuously increased during the first few centuries of the
fEirst millennium BCE. The exact process of the spread of Aramaic and the reasons why it
became the predominant language in both Assyria and Babylonia are yet unknown. One
theory is that the presumed large amount of Aramaic speakers that were resettled into
R
Assyria and that were assimilated into Assyrian society had a major influence on the local
Assyrian population in linguistic terms. In addition, Aramaic was the most widely used
language west of Assyria due to the presence of numerous Aramaean states in northern
Mesopotamia, Syria and even eastern Anatolia, and was thus used as the diplomatic lan-
guage between Assyria and its western vassals (Tadmor 1987, 449, 451–452; Pitard 1994.
227; for a general overview see also Niehr 2014).
The reason why it is so difficult to trace the spread of Aramaic is that Aramaic was writ-
ten on perishable material so that only very few documents and written attestations of its
use are preserved. What we can deduct with relative certainty from the attested material,
is that Aramaic had become the second administrative language of Assyria by the eight to
seventh centuries BCE and that by the sixth century BCE, the Neo Babylonian royal
0004541074.INDD 463 1/21/2020 4:13:04 PM
464 Rebecca Hasselbach‐Andee
administration was most likely bilingual (Beaulieu 2013, 359). Evidence for the use of
Aramaic comes from both written and other sources. Depictions of Aramaic scribes writ-
ing on parchment versus Akkadian scribes writing on tablets are known from Neo Assyrian
reliefs starting with Tiglath‐Pileser III (744–727 BCE). From the textual point of view,
Neo Assyrian documents mention Aramaic scribes. Furthermore, a few texts in Aramaic
are preserved from both the Neo Assyrian and Neo Babylonian periods. These written
S
sources include a bilingual Assyrian – Aramaic inscription dating to the second half of the
ninth century BCE that has been found in Tell Fekheriye and that shows the use of both
languages side by side (see e.g. Sasson 1985). Cuneiform tablets sFometimes contain
Aramaic clay epigraphs (Fales 1986), while some 200 administrative tablets and fragments
in Aramaic have been discovered that date to the seventh to theO sixth centuries BCE (Gzella
2015, 109; see also Streck 2011, 417‐418). After the sixth century BCE, the evidence for
Aramaic increases, but it never comes close to the amount of texts written in Akkadian at
O
the same time.
The aforementioned is very meager evidence for what must have been the actual situa-
tion regarding the use of Aramaic versus AkRkadian in both Assyria and Babylonia.
Furthermore, its use as secondary administrative language, as Aramaic is presented in the
written material, hardly explains the outcome of the contact between Aramaic and
P
Akkadian, namely the death of Akkadian as a spoken language and its replacement by
Aramaic around the fifth to fourth centuries BCE. Language shift usually involves a period
of bilingualism that precedes the mon olingualism in a new language. In many cases of
language shift, a group becomeDs transitionally bilingual in a new language, often through
contact with a more powerful group, until the new language becomes the main spoken
language and the former native language is given up (Romaine 2003, 526–527). This
E
means that Aramaic must have first become the secondary language of the local Akkadian
speaking population, resulting in Akkadian – Aramaic bilingualism, before it became the
S
predominant language, which led to the decline of Akkadian as spoken language. How
and when this happened, and especially why Aramaic rose to such a predominance over
the language oIf the seemingly militarily and culturally predominant local population, is
V
impossible to tell with the evidence at our disposal. The written record does not reflect
this language shift until centuries later – Akkadian being written until the first century CE.
EBesides the meager textual evidence, the growing influence of Aramaic can be noticed
through contact features in Akkadian such as loanwords and grammatical structures that
reflect interference from Aramaic. It is disputed how many Aramaic loanwords there are
R
in first millennium BCE Akkadian, especially in Neo and Late Babylonian. The loanwords
that are more widely accepted come from semantic fields such as alphabetic writing, trade,
cattle farming, and the military (Gzella 2015, 122). In general, Neo Assyrian shows rela-
tively little and primarily lexical influence from Aramaic (Streck 2011, 418), while Neo
and Late Babylonian also exhibit interference in their grammar. Beaulieu (2013) suggests
a few grammatical features in Neo and Late Babylonian that are most likely the result of
contact with Aramaic, such as the form anı̄nu for the 1cp independent pronoun “us” for
normative Akkadian nı̄nu. This form is most likely the result of an analogical extension of
the initial syllable of the Aramaic pronoun (Beaulieu 2013, 363–364). Another feature is
the appearance of a 3fs prefix t‐ on the preterite and durative, where normative Babylonian
has i‐, as in 3fs taparras instead of iparras. This shift from i‐ to t‐ is most likely influenced
0004541074.INDD 464 1/21/2020 4:13:04 PM
Multilingualism and Diglossia in the Ancient Near East 465
by Aramaic, which regularly has a t‐prefix in the 3fs. Furthermore, the form iprus can be
used as precative/jussive without the common Akkadian precative marker l‐ (as in
Babylonian liprus), which is typical in Aramaic (Beaulieu 2013, 364‐370). There is thus
both lexical and structural influence on Akkadian. The influence of Akkadian on Aramaic,
on the other hand, is primarily lexical (Gzella 2015, 120). There are about 200 Akkadian
loanwords in Aramaic, mostly in eastern Aramaic varieties such as Syriac, Mandaic, and
S
Jewish Babylonian Aramaic, which primarily consist of nouns relating to administration,
economy, law, and a few other semantic fields (Gzella 2015, 120). These different borrow-
ing patterns support the idea that Aramaic became the predomFinant language in
Mesopotamia while Akkadian was reduced to certain functions such as administrative ones.
A last issue to be addresses is that of diglossia. It has beenO suggested that around the
eighth to seventh centuries BCE, when Akkadian was still a spoken and fully productive
language, there existed a diglossic situation in Mesopotamia that involved Akkadian as
O
written and Aramaic as spoken language (see e.g. Gzella 2015, 119). This view, however,
is rather problematic. At this time, Akkadian was most certainly still spoken, while Aramaic
was also written and used as an administrative lRanguage. To which degree both languages
were used for each function is impossible to know, but given that Aramaic was written on
perishable material, we simply do not have the material evidence to judge how widely it
P
was used in writing. Claims of diglossia involving Akkadian and Aramaic at this time
should thus be viewed with caution since both Aramaic and Akkadian were used in writing
and as spoken languages.
There is another situation dDuring the first millennium BCE that might be analyzed as
diglossic, however, and that is the use between different forms of Akkadian. During the
first millennium BCE, N
E
eo Assyrian, Neo Babylonian, and Late Babylonian were used for
writing certain genres such as letters and administrative texts. For literary purposes, a dif-
ferent form of Akkadian, Standard Babylonian, was used. Neo Assyrian and Neo Babylonian
S
were certainly closer to what people actually spoke than the artificially created literary
dialect of Standard Babylonian (see chapter 25). Beaulieu has suggested (2013, 359) that
there was diglIossia between the spoken forms of Neo Assyrian and Neo Babylonian versus
V
Standard Babylonian as the literary language. Although the former were also written, we
can notice a clear functional and institutionalized division between the different varieties
oEf Akkadian at this time. When we look for diglossia in Akkadian, this would certainly be
a good place to start.
R
Diglossia in Aramaic
As discussed in the previous section, it can be difficult to determine if a situation repre-
sents diglossia when dealing with ancient languages because of the lack of evidence for the
spoken varieties and the, often ambiguous, data coming from written sources. There is
one case, however, that very closely resembles Ferguson’s definition and examples of
diglossia that can be found in the evidence of ancient Semitic languages, and that is the
case of Aramaic during the Achaemenid period. During the Old Aramaic period, that is,
during the ninth and eighth centuries BCE, the Aramaic inscriptions found in the Levant,
northern Mesopotamia, and Anatolia clearly show dialect variations. There did not exist a
standardized dialect used for writing but each of the independent Aramean states, such as
0004541074.INDD 465 1/21/2020 4:13:04 PM
466 Rebecca Hasselbach‐Andee
Damascus, Hamath, Arpad, Tell Halaf, and Sam’al, used their own variety of Aramaic in
writing (Folmer 1995, 1). With the spread of Aramaic as administrative language, first
with the Assyrians and then, more importantly, the Achaemenid Empire, however, the
written form of Aramaic was standardized based on a particular variety of Aramaic and
exhibits an astounding degree of uniformity, although certain minor variations depending
on area and genre are found as well (for a general study of Imperial Aramaic see Folmer
S
1995; see also chapter 17). Despite these minor variations, the textual material attested
during the Achaemenid period represents a standardized norm used for writing that
replaced the previous local written varieties. This does not mean, hoFwever, that people
also spoke the same variant of Aramaic used in writing. That this was not the case is clear
from the fact that local varieties, such as Nabatean, Hatran, vaOrious Jewish Aramaic dia-
lects, etc., start to emerge in writing after the decline of the Achaemenid Empire. These
local varieties did not emerge from nothing but reflect dialects that were continued to be
O
spoken during the Achaemenid Empire, they just were not used in writing – although they
might have been responsible for some of the local variations attested in Imperial Aramaic
(see e.g. Gzella 2015, 164). During the AchaeRmenid Empire we thus have a very clear
functional distribution of different varieties of Aramaic: Imperial Aramaic, the standard-
ized written form, was used for all types of writing, while the local dialects were solely used
P
for oral communication and only started to be written after the loss of the central admin-
istrative and political power that had driven the standardization and unification of the
official idiom. Although this period is often overlooked in discussions of diglossia in the
Ancient Near East (for an exceDption see Taylor 2002, 301), it represents a proto‐typical
example of diglossia according to Ferguson’s definition of the term.
E
Hebrew and Aramaic
S
Another situation that is often interpreted as representing diglossia is that of Hebrew or
Hebrew and Aramaic during the late Second Temple period, that is, between 100 BCE and
100 CE. MuchI work has in particular been done on the linguistic situation of Jews in
V
Palestine during the first century CE (see e.g. Paulston 2000; Porter 2000; Smith 2000;
Spolsky 1991; Watt 2000). During this time, multiple languages were spoken by the
JeEwish population of the area, including Hebrew, Aramaic, Greek, and Latin. It is com-
monly accepted that the variant of Hebrew that was spoken at this time was Mishnaic
Hebrew (Spolsky 1991, 89; Rendsburg 1990, 11), while Biblical Hebrew was only used
R
in written form, mostly for liturgical and religious purposes, that is for formal specialized
functions (Smith 2000, 38). The “vernacular” form, Mishnaic Hebrew, however, was
written as well in some instances, as evidenced by the so‐called Bar‐Kokhba letters, a bun-
dle of 15 letters by a military commander giving instructions to his troops, which date to
the first half of the second century CE. These letters consist of letters in three languages,
Aramaic (eight letters), Mishnaic Hebrew (five letters), and Greek (two letters), and are
usually seen as proof that Mishnaic Hebrew was indeed a spoken and not just scholarly
language (Rendsburg 1990, 9; Spolsky 1991, 89). It is commonly assumed that Hebrew
was spoken by at least parts of the Jewish population until the end of the Bar Kokhba
rebellion, that is, until about 135 CE. The degree to which Mishnaic Hebrew was spoken
at this time, however, is highly disputed. Some scholars assume that it was still used by a
0004541074.INDD 466 1/21/2020 4:13:04 PM
Multilingualism and Diglossia in the Ancient Near East 467
majority of the Jewish population in at least areas such as Judea (e.g. Spolsky 1991, 89),
while others assume that Aramaic was the primary language of the Jewish population of
that time and Hebrew was primarily used by educated Jews (e.g. Porter 2000, 57).
It is well known that Aramaic had started to replace Hebrew as a spoken language in
Palestine centuries earlier. By the first century CE, Aramaic and Hebrew speaking areas
had been adjacent and in direct contact for at least a millennium. Furthermore, during the
S
Babylonian exile, Jews were increasingly exposed to Aramaic, which was one of the major
languages used in Babylonia at the time. Lastly, as mentioned above, Aramaic had become
the official language of the Achaemenid Empire, which caused it to sprFead over large areas
of the Ancient Near East. All of these factors led the originally Hebrew speaking popula-
tion of Palestine to increasingly use Aramaic. By the first centurOy CE, Aramaic had become
the local vernacular of the area (Spolsky 1991, 94). Besides its use as spoken language,
Aramaic was also used for various written and official purposes, including commercial and
O
legal transactions such as marriage and divorce contracts. It was further used for liturgical
purposes in the form of Targumim, which are translations of the Hebrew Bible into
Aramaic. These Targumim were initially onlyR transmitted and recited orally, although
eventually they were written down as well. Targumim were intended for the general popu-
lation who did not understand Hebrew any longer and thus must have been in an Aramaic
P
dialect that was relatively close to a spoken form – although how close or how different
Targumic Aramaic was to the everyday colloquial Aramaic exactly is difficult to know.
Within these various types of written Aramaic, it is further possible to distinguish certain
regional variants, such as JudeDan and Galilean Aramaic (Watt 2000, 30).
As can be seen from this short description, the linguistic situation of Jews in Palestine
during the late Second Temple period is rather complex. There were two distinguishable
E
variants of Hebrew used for different purposes, Biblical and Mishnaic Hebrew, and also
several varieties of Aramaic that were both written and spoken.
S
Based on this situation, scholars have suggested two main options for diglossia during
this period. The most common view found is that, in accordance with Ferguson’s initial
definition of tIhe term, there existed diglossia between two varieties of the same language,
V
namely Biblical and Mishnaic Hebrew. Biblical Hebrew supposedly represents the High
variety, that is, the variety used for literature, while Mishnaic Hebrew reflects the Low
vEariety used for everyday communication (see e.g. Rendsburg 1990, 7‐9; Spolsky 1991,
91; Smith 2000, 49–50). As reasonable as this interpretation seems at first sight, it faces
several problems. As mentioned before, it is far from certain to which degree Mishnaic
R
Hebrew was still spoken during the late Second Temple period. Furthermore, Biblical
Hebrew was not the most commonly written language of the Jewish community of the
time. It is true that it was used for religious and liturgical purposes, but it did not represent
an institutionalized written standard for other types of writing. Aramaic and Greek were
written more commonly, especially for legal and administrative purposes. The situation is
thus more complex than simply assuming two varieties of Hebrew that stand in a diglossic
relationship. Biblical and Mishnaic Hebrew are functionally distinct, but it is questionable
if they truly meet the criteria for diglossia set up by Ferguson. The simple division between
Biblical Hebrew = H and Mishnaic Hebrew = L further neglects to incorporate Aramaic
and Greek, which were both widely used languages in the Jewish communities at this
time. During the first century CE, Greek was the language of government in Palestine.
0004541074.INDD 467 1/21/2020 4:13:04 PM
468 Rebecca Hasselbach‐Andee
Greek was also used for both public and private inscriptions, including many Jewish tomb
inscriptions (Spolsky 1991, 95–96; Smith 2002, 63). In a simplified way, Hebrew was
used for sacred writing, Aramaic for legal contracts and commerce, and Greek for govern-
ment writing and many public and private inscriptions (Spolsky 1991, 98; Taylor 2002,
301). Of course, there were local variations in the distribution of these languages, differ-
ences between towns that had large Greek‐speaking population groups and those that did
S
not, urban and rural areas, etc., but the aforementioned distribution of written languages
holds roughly in general.
Given these issues, it has also been suggested that there was no Fdiglossia between
two varieties of the same language, but, according to the broadened definition of
diglossia introduced by Fishman, between two different but Oclosely related languages,
namely Hebrew and Aramaic. This idea has in particular been promoted by Watt
(2000). Watt considers Aramaic, which he says was both written and spoken within the
O
Jewish community during the late Second Temple period, to be the native language of
Jews at this time, that is, the idiom used for all types of verbal and unofficial commu-
nications, while Hebrew was only used by cerRtain scholarly circles and perhaps in the
temple (Watt 2000, 25–26). In order to incorporate Greek, which Watt says was both
written and spoken, he introduces the concept of “tertiary” (T) language. A tertiary
P
language is a third language in addition to the two others that form a diglossic situa-
tion, which has to be included for a comprehensive descriptions of a given linguistic
community (Watt 2000, 32–34). Aga in, this idea faces several problems. The extent to
which Aramaic was spoken is uDnknown, although it seems that it was more widely used
than Mishnaic Hebrew. The biggest issue, however, is that Aramaic was, as mentioned
before and as admitted by Watt himself, written as well and even used for liturgical
E
purposes in the form of Targumim. Consequently, Aramaic does not fit the usual
understanding of a Low variety at this particular time period and the distinction of
S
Aramaic as L and Hebrew as H fails to convince.
Given these issues, scholars have also suggested not to use the concept of diglossia for
describing the lIinguistic situation in Palestine in the late Second Temple period, but to use
V
other models and approaches to analyze the function and usages of the different languages
and varieties of this time, such as register studies (see e.g. Porter 2000, 72). Considering
thEe complexity of the multilingual situation, a different approach might indeed be more
fruitful for the analysis of the linguistic situation during the late Second Temple period.
R
Conclusion
As can be seen from the preceding discussion, the question of diglossia in Ancient Near
Eastern societies is a complex one. It is essential for the study of diglossia to be aware what
languages/dialects people speak in their everyday interactions, but it is exactly this evi-
dence that is not available in most cases when working with ancient languages. Scholars of
ancient languages are naturally limited to written evidence and consequently limited in the
conclusions they can draw with regard to any sociolinguistic situation.
Consequently, although multilingualism is prevalent in Ancient Near Eastern societies,
it can be difficult to determine how this multilingualism was realized in practice, that is,
to what degree the general population was bi‐ or multilingual and for which functions
0004541074.INDD 468 1/21/2020 4:13:05 PM
Multilingualism and Diglossia in the Ancient Near East 469
the specific languages were used exactly. This does not mean that studies of diglossia and
related phenomena should be abandoned, they should just be conducted and viewed
with the necessary caution and the awareness of the difficulties involved in the interpreta-
tion of the evidence.
S
REFERENCES
Beaulieu, P. 2013. “Aspects of Aramaic and Babylonian Linguistic IntFeraction in the First
Millennium BC Iraq.” Journal of Language Contact, 6: 358–378.
Biggs, R. D. 1967. “Semitic Names in the Fara Period.” OrieOntalia, 36: 55–66.
Crisostomo, C. J. 2015. “Language, Writing, and Ideologies in Contact: Sumerian and
Akkadian in the Early Second Millennium BCE.” In Semitic Languages in Contact, edited
O
by A. M. Butts, 158–180. Leiden: Brill.
Ferguson, C. A. 1959. “Diglossia.” Word, 15: 325–340.
Ferguson, C. A. 1991. “Diglossia RevisitedR.” Southwest Journal of Linguistics, 10:
214–234.
Fewster, P. 2002. “Bilingualism in Roman Egypt.” In Bilingualism in Ancient Society:
P
Language Contact and the Written Text, edited by J.N. Adams, Mark Janse, and Simon
Swain, 220–245. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Fishman, J. A. 1967. “Bilingualism With and Without Diglossia; Diglossia With and
Without Bilingualism.” JourDnal of Social Issues, 2: 29–38.
Folmer, M. L. 1995. The Aramaic Language in the Achaemenid Period: A Study in
Linguistic Variation. Leuven: Peeters.
E
Galter, H. D. 1995. “Cuneiform Bilingual Inscriptions.” In Language and Culture in the
Near East, edited by Shlomo Izre’el and Rina Drory, 25–50. Leiden: Brill.
S
Gzella, H. 2015. A Cultural History of Aramaic: From the Beginnings to the Advent of
Islam. Leiden: Brill.
Krebernik, MI. 1998. “Die Texte aus Fāra und Tell Abū Salābı̄ḫ.” In Mesopotamien –
V
Späturuk‐Zeit und Frühdynastische Zeit, edited by P. Attinger, 237–427. Göttingen:
Vandenhoek and Ruprecht.
LEangslow, D.R. 2002. Approaching Bilingualism in Corpus Languages. In Bilingualism
in Ancient Society: Language Contact and the Written Text, edited by J.N. Adams, Mark
Janse, and Simon Swain, 23–51. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
R
Niehr, H., ed. 2014. The Aramaeans in Ancient Syria. Leiden: Brill.
Pardee, D. 2004. “Ugaritic.” In The Cambridge Encyclopedia of the World’s Ancient Languages,
edited by Roger D. Woodard, 288–318. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Paulston, C. B. 2000. “Language Repertoire and Diglossia in First‐Century Palestine:
Some Comments.” In Diglossia and Other Topics in New Testament Linguistics, edited
by Stanley E. Porter, 79–89. Sheffield: Sheffield Academic Press.
Pitard, W. T. 1994. “Arameans.” In Peoples of the Old Testament World, edited by Alfred J.
Hoerth, Gerald L. Mattingly, and Edwin M. Yamauchi, 207–230. Grand Rapids: Baker
Books.
Porter, S. E. 2000. “The Functional Distribution of Koine Greek in First‐Century
Palestine.” In Diglossia and Other Topics in New Testament Linguistics, edited by Stanley
E. Porter, 53–78. Sheffield: Sheffield Academic Press.
0004541074.INDD 469 1/21/2020 4:13:05 PM
470 Rebecca Hasselbach‐Andee
Rendsburg, G. A. 1990. Diglossia in Ancient Hebrew. New Haven: American Oriental
Society.
Romaine, S. 2003. “Multilingualism.” In The Handbook of Linguistics, edited by Mark
Aronoff and Janie Rees‐Miller, 512–532. Malden, MA: Blackwell.
Schendl, H. 2014. “Multilingualism, Code‐switching, and Language Contact in Historical
Sociolinguistics.” In The Handbook of Historical Sociolinguistics, edited by Juan M.
S
Hernández‐Campoy and J. Camilo Conde‐Silvestre, 520–533. Malden, MA: Wiley
Blackwell.
Smith, S. P. 2000. “The Question of Diglossia in Hebrew.” In DiglossiFa and Other Topics
in New Testament Linguistics, edited by Stanley E. Porter, 37–50. Sheffield: Sheffield
Academy Press. O
Spolsky, B. 1991. “Diglossia in Hebrew in the Late Second Temple Period.” Southwest
Journal of Linguistics, 10: 85–104.
O
Streck, M. P. 2011. “Akkadian and Aramaic Language Contact.” In The Semitic Languages:
An International Handbook, edited by Stefan Weninger, 416–424. Berlin: de Gruyter.
Tadmor, H. 1987. “The Aramaization of ARssyria: Aspects of Western Impact.” In
Mesopotamien und seine Nachbarn: Politische und kulturelle Wechselbeziehungen im
Alten Vorderasien vom 4. bis 1. Jahrtausend v. Chr., edited by Hans‐Jörg Nissen and
P
Johannes Renger, 449–470. Berlin: Dietrich Reimer.
Taylor, D. G. K. 2002. “Bilingualism and Diglossia in Late Antique Syria and Mesopotamia.”
In Bilingualism in Ancient Society: L anguage Contact and the Written Word, edited by
J.N. Adams, M. Janse and SiDmon Swain, 298–331. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Vanstiphout, H. L. J. 1999. “The Twin Tongues. Theory, Technique, and Practice of
Bilingualism in Ancient Mesopotamia.” In All those Nations… Cultural Encounters
E
within and with the Near East, edited by H.L.J. Vanstiphout, 141–159. Groningen:
Styx.
S
Versteegh, K. 2002. “Dead or Alive? The Status of the Standard Language.” In Bilingualism
in Ancient Society: Language Contact and the Written Text, edited by J.N. Adams, Mark
Janse, and SiImon Swain, 52–74. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
V
Watt, J. M. 2000. “The Current Landscape of Diglossia Studies: The Diglossic Continuum
in First‐Century Palestine.” In Diglossia and Other Topics in New Testament Linguistics,
Eedited by Stanley E. Porter, 18–36. Sheffield: Sheffield Academic Press.
Weinreich, U. 1968. Languages in Contact: Findings and Problems. The Hague: de
Gruyter Mouton.
R
Zólyomi, G. 2011. “Akkadian and Sumerian Language Contact.” In The Semitic
Languages: An International Handbook, edited by Stefan Weninger, 396–404. Berlin:
de Gruyter.
0004541074.INDD 470 1/21/2020 4:13:05 PM

# FIGURE

# BIBLIOGRAPHY

