# METADATA
author: Jacquet A.
source_id:Jacquet0000_FamilyArch
title: Family Archives In Mesopotamia During The Old Babylonian Period
Year: Unknown
Source_ID:  Jacquet0000_FamilyArch
Source_Type: Article in Book:
Source_Role,Step_distance: 0,1,2 ,3,4 
Pages:  63-86
Web: 
# TEXT

Family Archives in
Mesopotamia during the
Old Babylonian Period1
antoine jacquet
The leadership exerted by the kingdom of Babylon under the rule of kings Ham-
mu-rabi and Samsu-iluna, especially between 1764 and 1712 B.C., led scholars to
call Old Babylonian the period spanning from the 20th to the 17th century. Except-
ed this short period, the whole four centuries are however rather characterized
by a political parcelling out and Mesopotamia was most of the time divided into
several kingdoms dominating larger or smaller areas (Isin, Larsa, Ešnunna, Mari,
Ekallatum, Babylon, etc.).2 The unity of this period has to be looked for on a cul-
tural level. Semitic populations called Amorites had settled in the whole Meso-
potamian plain as early as the end of the 3rd millennium.3 During the first cen-
1 This study was written within the framework of the project “Archibab: Archives babyloni-
ennes (XXe-XVIIe siècles)” directed by Dominique Charpin and supported by the Agence Natio-
nale de la Recherche. D. Charpin read the present manuscript carefully and addressed me valuable
remarks. I also benefitted from very fruitful discussions with S. Démare-Lafont. Unpublished
texts from the Nies Babylonian Collection (NBC) are quoted here with the kind permission of
B. R. Foster, Laffan Professor of Assyriology and curator of the Yale Babylonian Collection. It is
my pleasant duty to thank all of them sincerely.
2 See in general Charpin 2004.
3 The early diffusion of Amorite traditions through Mesopotamia has been pointed out by
specialists; see Sallaberger 2007, and, for another point of view, Michalowski 2011, especially
Chapter 5: “The Amorites in Ur III Times”, p. 82-121.
family archives in mesopotamia… 63
turies of the 2nd millennium, they formed a real koinè characterized by common
references and practices in many domains such as religion and cults or social
and political organization.4 One of these common practices definitely was the
use of writing in a lot of activities and situations of everyday life, maybe after the
model constituted for a long time by some great bodies present in every part of
every kingdom (palace and temple administrations) and certainly related to the
development of new institutions.
The documentation of the Amorite period is actually characterized by a huge
increase of archival texts, in number as much as in variety.5 By studying political
structures of ancient Mesopotamia, we are rapidly led to admit that we never
have to deal with States or Cities ruled by formal constitutions comparable to
Greek Cities. We often have to deal, on the contrary, with individuals and groups
of people organized according to different coexisting local or tribal traditions,
kingship being only one figure of authority among others.6 The question of the
relations between archival and institutional practices can hardly find an answer
as for the Amorite period. However the obvious importance of writing implies a
very profitable reflection on the use of producing, keeping, gathering and trans-
mitting written records regarding authority.
After a general presentation of the Old Babylonian archival documentation,
this paper will come to the interesting problem of the function and motivation
of family archives and archival documents. This will be an occasion to present
some unpublished examples from the archives of Marduk-muballiṭ, resident of
the city of Lagaba, now essentially kept in the Yale Babylonian Collection.
1. An Inventory of Old Babylonian Archives
In this general presentation, the reader will be provided at first with some quan-
titative data about archival documents, then with some elements about who pos-
sessed archives in the Mesopotamia of the beginning of the 2nd millennium and
finally with a tentative typology of archival documents and the question of utility
of such an enterprise.
The ARCHIBAB project is directed by Prof. Dominique Charpin and supported
by the French Agence Nationale de la Recherche. Its purpose is to gather every Old
Babylonian archival document presently published into a digital data base which
4 The idea of a widespread Amorite culture in Mesopotamia during the first centuries of the
2nd millennium was first brilliantly developed in Durand 1992. For political matters, see Char-
pin 2004, especially Chapter 8, “La vie politique au Proche-Orient vers 1765”, p. 232-316.
5 See in general Charpin 2008a, “Chapitre 3: Les documents d’archives”, p. 97-129 (English
version: Charpin 2010, “Chapter two: The Archival Documents”, p. 68-114).
6 See Durand 2004; Charpin 2007.
64
can be freely browsed online.7 We first had to count precisely how many texts we
had to deal with, whose number eventually appeared to be much underestimat-
ed: there are 32092 archival documents currently published.8 Among them, only
19585 texts have a well established origin thanks to regular excavations which
provide us with, at least, the name of the modern site and, when it is known,
the name of the ancient city, or, at most, a precise locus, a building and a room,
a detailed archaeological context. These documents come from about 40 sites all
over Mesopotamia, from the Mediterranean coastal area to the West to Iran to
the East and from the Taurus to the North to the Gulf and Arabic Desert to the
South. This undoubtedly represents a unique documentary situation regarding
the whole Mesopotamian Ancient History.
Table 1:
Distribution of published archival documents throughout Old Babylonian Mesopotamia9
1. Southern Babylonia 1.1 Ur (tell Muqqayair) 1250
1.2 Uruk (Warka) 793
1.3 Larsa (tell Senkereh) 972
1.4 Lagaš (al Hibar) and Girsu (Tello) 27
1.5 Kutalla (tell Sifr) 106
Total: 3148
2. Central Babylonia 2.1 Nippur (Nuffar) 1172
2.2 Isin (Išān Baḥrīyat) 1040
2.3 Kisurra (Abu Hatab) 477
2.4 Adab (Bismaya) 57
Total: 2746
3. Northern Babylonia 3.1 Babylon 113
3.2 Sippar Yahrurum (Abu Habbah) 246
3.3 Sippar Amnânum (Tell ed-Dêr) 445
Total: 804
7 For a general presentation of the project, see the PDF document “Présentation ARCHIBAB”
to be downloaded at <http://www.archibab.fr/Accueil.htm>, which gives two more references
to presentations by D. Charpin also downloadable at http://www.digitorient.com.
8 Data provided by the Archibab data-base (2012/5/7).
9 Table first drawn by D. Charpin (see Charpin in press a) with updated data according to the
Archibab data-base (2012/5/7).
family archives in mesopotamia… 65
4. Diyala Basin 4.1 Ešnunna (Tell Asmar) 61
4.2 Nêrebtum (Ischali) 133
4.3 Tutub (Khafajah) 111
4.4 Šaduppum (tell Harmal) 194
4.5 Uzarlulu (Dhib‘ai) 5
4.6 Tulul Khattab 37
4.7 Mê-Turan (Tell Ḥaddad and Tell es-Sib) 170
4.8 Tell Yelkhi? 28
Total: 739
5. Susa and Elam 5.1 Susa (Shush) 950
Total: 950
6. Middle Euphrates 6.1 Yabliya-al-kapim (tell Shishin) 8
6.2 Harrâdum (Khirbet ed-Diniye) 116
6.3 Mari (tell Hariri) 8813
6.4 Terqa (tell Ashara) 106
6.5 Tuttul (tell Bi‘a) 377
Total: 9420
7. Northern Mesopotamia 7.1 Ninive 3
7.2 Šušarra (Shemshāra) 243
7.3 Nuzi (Yorghan Tepe) 1(?)
7.4 Qaṭṭarâ (tell Rimah) 342
7.5 Zamiyatum(?) (tell Taya) 2
7.6 Razamâ of Yussân(?) (tell Hawa) 1(?)
7.7 Šehnâ / Šubat-Enlil (tell Leilan) 559
7.8 Ašnakkum (Chagar Bazar) 351
7.9 Ṭabatum (tell Tabān) 1
Total: 1503
8. Western Syria 8.1 Alalah (tell Atchana) 278
8.2 Ebla (tell Mardikh) 2
Total: 270
9. Palestine 9.1 Haṣor 4
9.2 Hebron 1
Total: 5
66
family archives in mesopotamia… 67
noitatnemucoD
lavihcrA
gnidivorP
doireP
etiromA
eht
ot
detaD
setiS
As for the 12507 remaining documents, they unfortunately come from irregu-
lar or ancient and non-scientific excavations in which diggers did not take pain
to record the place where they discovered the tablets. The combined action of
the looter and of the antique dealer caused not only to separate irremediably the
documents from their archaeological context, but also to dismantle the archives
which are then scattered all over the world in different public or private collec-
tions. Scholars often deal with isolated texts and first have to reconstruct the ar-
chives to which they belong. Computer-aided analysis is fortunately now very
helpful and the precise origin of the tablets can often be deduced by crossing dif-
ferent pieces of internal evidence such as philological or epigraphical details, the
typological or thematical situation of the document, chronological, topological
or prosopographical data, etc.10
2. Who Possessed Archives in the Old Babylonian Mesopotamian Society?
The question of literacy is one of the great issues of recent historiography about
the Ancient Near East. The idea that reading and writing were not only a matter
of specialists or professional scribes but an ability shared by a rather large part
of the elite, at least from the beginning of the 2nd millennium on, now seems to
be broadly accepted.11 But archive keeping is another matter: on the one hand,
obviously not everyone who wrote personally kept documents and, on the other
hand, not everyone who kept personal archives at home did necessarily read and
write cuneiform Akkadian: the production of archive documents and their con-
servation aimed at particular goals.
2.1. Great Organisms and Private Houses
Archaeologists like to distinguish among their discoveries between palaces and
temples, which have an aura of prestige, and simple houses, supposed to be less
noble subjects of study; in the same way, epigraphists are used to oppose official
10 This is the category in which we are unfortunately forced to sort the texts supposedly com-
ing from Damrum (68 documents), Dur-Abi-Ešuh (89), Marad (3), Dilbat (73), Maškan-Šapir (1),
Sippar (1835 documents, without any indication of the very place of finding), Kiš (177), Ṣupur-
Šubula (44), Tigunanum (2); some documents are assumed to come from an area, without be-
ing linked to a city: so are the 453 texts coming from “the vicinity of Nerebtum”, in the Diyala
Valley, or those from “the vicinity of Nusaybin”. These data must be taken as a coarse evaluation
of the documentary situation and are supposed to be refined progressively as the Archibab data-
base catalogue will get completed.
11 See Charpin 2008a, especially “Chapitre 1: Une affaire de spécialistes?”, p. 31-60, quoting
Vanstiphout 1995, p. 2188, and Postgate 1992, and developing his own argumentation; Eng-
lish version now published as “Reading and Writing in Mesopotamia: The Business of Special-
ists?” in Charpin 2011, p. 7-24.
68
archives, the ones produced and kept by great organisms (palaces and temples)
on the one hand and so called “private archives” on the other hand, with often
the same distinction in terms of prestige.12 As a matter of fact archives of great
organisms are the mere consequence of the attention to economic bookkeeping.
They appeared early during the 3rd millennium and kept on existing until the end
of Mesopotamian Antiquity. They are no “State archives” but only the accumula-
tion of personal and administrative archives: the archives of the King, especially
his correspondence, are kept together with the records produced by the differ-
ent administrative services of the Palace. The latter, private archives, increased in
number during the OB period, although they already existed during the 3rd mil-
lennium. They range from small groups of tablets to huge collections of records
of a finally larger typological richness than archives of great organisms.13 In the
following pages, attention will be especially paid to these private archives.
2.2. The mark of the elites
We have to consider that accumulation and transmission of archival documents
is generally a fact of members of the social and economic elite, private entrepre-
neurs or servants of the palace, merchants, farmers, priests, etc. These people
owned houses and lands, slaves, silver or grain that they could lend at interest,
and every kind of precious things. This also explains why the distinction be-
tween official and private archives is not as significant as this modern terminol-
ogy might suggest.14 The very reason for the existence of archival documents is
the existence of valuable goods that could be owned, acquired, sold, shared or
claimed before a jurisdiction. The redaction of these documents is the result of
acts that transfer or confirm authority on a good or a person.
2.3. Archives of men, archives of women?
The use of written records is not only the fact of men but also of some women,
either singles or widows or even married ones managing their goods without
needing any man’s consent.15 Some special categories of women such as conse-
12 Official excavations actually often concentrated particularly on palaces and temples, as in
the great sites of Nineve, Mari, or Ebla, and left apart whole districts of private houses and the
private archives they must have contained.
13 For an example of the intense activity of scribes in some families, see Tanret 2004.
14 See Veenhof 1986, p. 9-11.
15 On women in Ancient Near East, see in general the papers read at the 33rd Rencontre As-
syriologique Internationale (Durand 1987); sex and gender were at stake at the 47th Rencontre (see
Parpola & Whiting 2002); see also Briquel-Chatonnet et al. 2009, especially the third part
of the book “Femmes lettrées, archives de femmes dans le Proche-Orient ancien”, p. 215-332. A
good presentation of the Old Babylonian problematics is in Barberon 2003.
family archives in mesopotamia… 69
crated women called nadîtum, who were vowed to the male deity of their city
or of a renowned sanctuary of the kingdom (at first, the temple of the Sun God,
Šamaš, in Sippar) were also free from any man’s control and could write, use and
keep archival documents:16 these women received precious dowries and were
in some cases even elevated to the status of heir. They were able to buy some
real estate properties. They could lend silver. They were exposed to every kind
of litigation. Then, they used written records just like the men of their family
and neighborhood did. They had their own seal, which was extremely rare as
for women. However, the existence of archives of women is discussed. Contrary
to what was thought formerly, we are now aware that the main part of archival
documents concerning the goods of nadîtum-women of Šamaš living in Sippar
were not found in their own houses, in the cloister of Abu Habbah, but in vari-
ous houses in tell Abu Habbah and the neighboring tell ed-Dêr. The archives of
nadîtum actually were a part of the archives of their family, kept in the house of
the family chief (the father, a brother or uncle).
3. A Typology of Archival Documents and their Function
Regarding Authority
Scholars often distinguish three types of archival documents: letters, legal doc-
uments and administrative documents (which are rather to be considered as
bookkeeping documents, because they are not necessarily produced by an ad-
ministration in the modern sense of that word). This typology used to be a guide
for the publication of texts. As a result, students often have to look for documents
belonging to one same archive and kept in one museum but published in differ-
ent volumes because letters, legal and administrative documents were published
separately.17 Although this typology is helpful to understand the sense of each
text taken apart, it is an obstacle to the understanding of the meaning of the ar-
chives themselves, where documents of different nature were kept together in a
same file because they only made sense (and can be now understood) together.
This is the direction that scholars have to follow now, trying to reconstruct the
16 See Barberon 2009.
17 A large number of projects used to exist in the first half of the 20th century but are no longer
living projects: see for example M. Schorr, Urkunden des Altbabylonischen Zivil- und Prozessrechts,
VAB 5, Leipzig, 1913 or A. Ungnad, Babylonische Briefe aus der Zeit der Ḫammurapi-Dynastie, VAB 6,
Leipzig, 1914, both aiming at publishing the entire corpus of legal documents (VAB 5) and let-
ters (VAB 6) then known; cf. also the 6 volumes of the Hammurabis Gesetz series (Leipzig, 1904-
1923), devoted to Old Babylonian legal documents. The Altbabylonische Briefe series founded by
F. R. Kraus at the University of Leyden in 1964 now comprises 14 volumes providing editions
of Old Babylonian letters; each volume is devoted to one collection or museum so that archives
are dismantled and the lack of indexes prevents scholars from searching all letters sent by or to
somebody.
70
original files and asking for each and every text why it was written, why it was
kept, why in this archive, by this person, a.s.o.18
For this reason another typology may be more helpful, according to the sta-
tus of the document whithin the archive where it was kept; two main categories
have to be distinguished: first, documents that normally had a limited validity
in time, and which should have been destroyed or at least discarded when they
were no longer valid; second, documents with unlimited validity, which were
supposed to be kept forever and came to constitute what is to be called family
archives.19 I will add a third type to this distinction: archives containing a lot of
texts written and kept only as aids to keep archives in order, by summing up the
content of texts that are present in the tablet room, or gathered in a tablet box or,
on the contrary, absent from the archives because they were momentarily useful
out of the file they belonged to20.
When we are lucky enough to deal with private archives found during regular
and scientific excavations, we can almost always note that the final point of the
accumulation of documents coincides with the abandonment of the house by the
family, after a catastrophe such as the destruction of the house by fire or by invad-
ers. Putting the whole archive in order, it is possible to note that the typology
of texts is much more varied for the last generation than for the previous ones,
which can be explained by the fact that a sort was regularly operated within the
archive and discarded documents were destroyed or put aside.21
3.1. Documents of Limited Validity Establishing Responsibility
Documents that we are used to distinguish as administrative documents, legal
documents or letters in our modern terminology were actually all preserved by
the ancient Mesopotamians in their archives for the same reason: because they
established and kept a trace of an individual responsibility before an authority.
As will be seen below, limits separating types of texts are tight and we should
rather distinguish, as the Ancients did, between documents without sealing and
sealed documents. Ancient Mesopotamians indeed called documents by the ge-
neric name ṭuppum “tablet”, or kanîkum “sealed document” when the cylindar seal
of the person whose responsibility was engaged was unrolled on it. For practical
18 For a good example of this approach, see Charpin 2000a, p. 77-78, dealing with a family
archive of the Old Babylonian city of Isin: two brothers opposed each other in a trial. The final
text, that was produced at the end of the case, can only be understood in the light of their exile,
which is only shown by the rest of the archive.
19 See Charpin in press a.
20 See Tanret 2008.
21 See in general the papers of the round table “Les phénomènes de fin d’archives en Mésopo-
tamie” edited by F. Joannès in the «Revue d’Assyriologie» 89 (1995), p. 1-147.
family archives in mesopotamia… 71
reasons, three types of documents of limited validity will be described in what
follows: bookkeeping documents, legal documents and letters.
Bookkeeping archives are usually considered as a useful tool to control and
anticipate economic activities or to manage a material or human resource.22 They
are also a way of controlling individuals who work in any administrative service
and have to justify before their superiors the management of the resource that
they are responsible for. For example, a quittance, which can be used as a book-
keeping record by the one who is responsible for the disbursement, also serves
as legal text as it is sealed by the recipient and can be presented as proof for a
payment before an administrative hierarchy or a jurisdiction. This is true in large
administrative services such as the palace of Mari, as it is in private houses where
an intendant is supposed to manage goods (silver, barley, dates, etc) for the bene-
fit of his master. The utility of bookkeeping texts rarely lasted more than one
year and often expired after the annual submitting of accounts and tax collect-
ing, usually fixed at harvest time or at the time of a religious festival; the text was
normally erased and the tablet regularly recycled by the office that produced it.23
In administrative services of the Palace of Mari for instance, some offices used
to discard daily records as soon as their content was written on a recapitulatory
tablet, unless they are sealed documents, supposed to be kept as legal or admin-
istrative proof of a payment: in that case, they used to mark them with a red ink
line, so that they are not counted twice but not recycled either.24
Short term contracts often contained the mention of their own expiry (loan
contracts, hiring contracts, leasing contracts, etc.). They are by nature part of this
first category of documents of limited validity. They were thus regularly taken
out of the archives and either destroyed, when their validity had expired, or can-
celled and marked with a cross scratched on the surface, when the dispositions
changed whereas the expiry had not passed.25
The utility of letters, finally, normally expired as soon as the message was
delivered and most of them must have been rapidly destroyed or recycled after
their reception. According to their content however, they could have been kept as
memories of an act of communication. As the envelope was printed with the seal
of the sender, a letter could be used as legal proof of a declaration of the sender or
for an order given to the recipient: for example, a letter in which the master of a
house orders his intendant to pay silver to a creditor will be kept by the intendant
as evidence to justify an expense when he shall present his accounts. There even
22 Wilcke 1970, p. 166 and, on the Mari archives especially, Ziegler 2001.
23 Some of these tablets, discarded as superfluous, however survived as “dead archives”, in sec-
ondary contexts when they were used to fill benches or floors, such as in the well known Room
116 of the palace of Mari.
24 Charpin 1984, p. 258-259.
25 That was commented by Veenhof 1995, p. 320; three examples now in Archibab: BDHP 30,
YOS 13 354, CBS 1153 [Stol Mél. Renger 1].
72
exist some letters containing this advice by the sender to the recipient: “Keep
this letter of mine as a testimony of my words”.26
The very reason to write and keep archival documents resides in the necessity
for everyone to be in possession of every title establishing one’s rights or pro-
tecting oneself against a possible future claim. In every case, such a document is
written in favour of the one whose rights might be contested, and kept by him.
It is sealed by the one who abandons his right or whose responsibility might be
engaged before an authority, should it be a jurisdiction or an administration. The
writing of the tablet is not of much value in itself. The document has to be sealed
to be valid before an administrative or legal authority. A document sealed in due
form cannot be contested before a court.27 Everyone who contracts and commits
oneself to do or not to do something had to unroll one’s seal on a written docu-
ment which was kept as a proof by the beneficiary of this commitment. In loan
contracts, for example, as long as the responsibility of a debtor is involved, the
creditor keeps the document as written evidence that could be produced before a
court as an argument supporting a claim. Each time that the responsibility of the
debtor is modified, a new sealed document is written in his favor. As soon as the
responsibility is completely removed, the original sealed document is broken so
that it cannot be produced anymore before any jurisdiction.28 These principles
help understand a lot of very allusive, albeit interesting, short notes that com-
pose the major part of the Old Babylonian archival documentation.
The following examples are taken out of the unpublished archives of Marduk-
naṣir, resident of Lagaba. NBC 8831 is a receipt of silver without any apparent
interest; it reads:29
26 See the list of references established by Veenhof 1986, p. 33 n. 125, now to be completed
with Charpin in press b, especially p. 52-54.
27 In the letter AbB 3 82, Ibbi-Sumuqan tries to dissuade Yahgunum from claiming a field that
he had sold three years before, using the following argument: “he (= the actual owner of the
field) brought me a tablet according to which he purchased the field from you. I saw it and it is
without any ambiguity: your seal and (the name of) 5 witnesses are written on it. If he shows
this tablet to judges, could they transgress the law in your favor?”. French translation and com-
mentary in Charpin 2000a, p. 77. On the attention paid to the legal status of a text, and the rich-
ness of related vocabulary, whether a tablet is sealed or not sealed, whether it comprises a date
or not, etc., see Charpin 2008b, p. 9 sq.
28 For that reason, we always have to wonder why a text was conserved, and thus discovered:
every loan contract that has come to us corresponds to a debt that actually was not reimbursed,
either because a catastrophe put an end to the activities of the creditor (and sometimes to the
archive itself), or because a general remission was proclamed by the king. It is now clearly at-
tested that kings of the Old Babylonian period could choose to cancel every debt in the country
by proclaming an edict of justice (mîšarum) every time that the kingdom was confronted to a
major economic crisis, and especially during the first year of their reign; in the latter case, loan
contracts often were conserved by the creditor, even though the debts had been remitted and
the tablet had no validity anymore; see Charpin 2000b.
29 NBC 8831: 1/2 GÍN KÙ.BABBAR, ŠU.TI.A ú-túl-(d)da-gan, KI (d)AMAR.UTU-mu-ba-lí-iṭ, ITI
APIN.DU8.A U4 10.KAM, MU GU.ZA NISAG(cid:1801).A.
family archives in mesopotamia… 73
“1/2 shekel of silver: receipt of Utul-Dagan, from Marduk-muballiṭ. 10/viii/Samsu-
iluna 5.”
This text should have been sealed by the recipient, Utul-Dagan, as receipts usu-
ally are, but it is not. This receipt was certainly not kept by Marduk-muballiṭ for
bookkeeping purposes only. Other documents in the archive, especially receipts
of barley or wool, allow to imagine that this text actually records the partial reim-
bursement of a debt by Marduk-muballiṭ to his creditor, Utul-Dagan. The origi-
nal contract, normally kept by the creditor, was not broken since the debt was not
completely reimbursed. This is why it is important for Marduk-muballiṭ to keep
this receipt safely as written evidence of his partial reimbursement of the silver,
which could be presented before a court in case of a claim over that silver.
A slightly different case can be imagined according to NBC 8908, which sim-
ply records a quantity of flour, written here without any key-word. In spite of the
lack of explicit elements of description, this six-line record is extremely helpful
to understand who is supposed to keep a document in his archives and for what
purpose. The text reads:30
“40 liters of flour. (If) the sealed document (kanîkum) of Marduk-muballiṭ (re)appears,
it will be broken. 1+/vii/Samsu-iluna 7.”
The seal of one Gimil-Gula is unrolled on the tablet.31 This is certainly the sign that
this record is a receipt and Gimil-Gula is the recipient, although his name is not
written in the text and neither the verb “to receive” (akkadian mahârum) nor the
noun “receipt” (akkadian namhartum or sumerian ŠU.TI.A) frequently used in the
standard phraseology of Old Babylonian receipts are written. The short sentence l.
2-4, although very laconic, allows us to understand why this document was written,
sealed by Gimil-Gula and kept by Marduk-muballiṭ: the flour was owed to Gimil-
Gula by Marduk-muballiṭ, which was recorded in an original loan contract, desig-
nated here by the expression kanîk Marduk-muballiṭ, literally “Marduk-muballiṭ’s
sealed document”, to be understood as “the document sealed by Marduk-muballiṭ
(and kept by Gimil-Gula)”. When Gimil-Gula came to recover his loan, he could not
find the original loan contract, sealed by Marduk-muballiṭ, which he must have
kept in his own archives as evidence of the loan. Marduk-muballiṭ accepted to re-
imburse him, certainly because they knew each other very well and were used to
have business together.32 In a normal procedure of reimbursement of a debt, the
original loan contract should have been broken and no more text written. In this
30 NBC 8908 (Lagaba, 1+vii/Si 7): 0,0.4 ZÌ.DA, ka-ni-ik (d)AMAR.UTU-mu-ba-lí-iṭ, i-il-li-a-am,
ih-he-ep-pi°, (cid:1903)ITI DU6(cid:1904).[KÙ] (cid:1903)U4 1+x(cid:1904).KAM, MU (giš)TUKUL ŠU.NIR.
31 Gimil-Gula, son of Šumum-libši, servant of Amurrum and Ninsianna gi4-mil-(cid:1903)(d)(cid:1904)GU.L[A]
/ (cid:1903)DUMU šu(cid:1904)-mu-um-(cid:1903)li(cid:1904)-ib-š[i] / ÌR (d)MAR.T[U] / ù (d)NIN.SI4.(cid:1903)AN.NA(cid:1904).
32 This Gimil-Gula is well known in other documents as a relative of Marduk-muballiṭ, the
owner of the archive.
74
special case, the present receipt was written in favor of Marduk-muballiṭ and kept
by him in his archives as evidence that he did reimburse the flour and that the
original contract has been discarded even though the tablet could not be broken33.
3.2. Documents of Unlimited Validity and the Constitution of the Family Archives
A second type of archival documents is composed of texts that have an unlim-
ited validity. In this category can be classified legal documents establishing the
status of goods and persons, such as titles of property, purchase or exchange con-
tracts, donations, dowries, marriage contracts, adoptions, inheritance contracts
describing parts of inheritance that were shared between heirs, etc.
This category is hardly represented in the archives of great organisms, palace
or temples, as if they did not have to justify their ownership, whereas they are a
large part of the archival documents found in private houses. The use of written
records of such legal acts seems to have largely increased during the Old Babylo-
nian period, which may be related to the emergence of a professional justice in
Mesopotamia during the Old Babylonian period, and maybe because, for the first
time, it was felt necessary to make up for the mortality of the witnesses or loss of
individual or collective memory, especially in legal procedures.34
It is now clearly established that written titles of property were supposed to
follow the goods every time they were sold, exchanged or shared. The texts were
transmitted by the former owner to the new one along with the goods them-
selves and were accumulated to form family archives.35 And then, the history of
a private property can often be reconstructed on a large span of time, sometimes
on about six generations and more than 200 years, as is the case with the amaz-
ing Ur-Utu archive. The archives of this religious dignitary of the city of Sippar-
Amnânum (tell ed-Der), north of Babylon, were discovered during regular exca-
vations by the Belgian team led by L. De Meyer. They had been abandonned there
by the last inhabitant of the house after a violent fire during which he obviously
tried to rescue them from destruction. Studying this wonderful archive (com-
posed of almost 2000 texts), M. Tanret and C. Janssen were able to highlight what
they called the “chains of transmission” of the property documents.36
33 This practice has been pointed out for a long time as for purchase contracts of land or
houses ; see Charpin 1996. What is interesting here is that this procedure is about a very cheap
object (40 liters of flour), which is proof for a wide generalization of the use of writing in legal
matters in the late Old Babylonian period.
34 See in general Charpin 2008a, “Chapitre 4: Le geste, la parole et l’écrit dans la vie juridique”,
p. 131-158 (English version: Charpin 2011, “Chapter 3. Old Babylonian Law: Gesture, Speech, and
Writing”, p. 43-52; see below for further developments and examples.
35 See especially Chapin 1986 (updated English version in Charpin 2010b, “Chapter 4. The
Transfer of Property Deeds and the Constitution of Family Archives”, p. 53-69) as a starting
point to a long series of studies.
36 The idea was elaborated and developped by the Belgian team of Ghent in charge of the
family archives in mesopotamia… 75
At the sale of a real estate property, the seller was supposed to give to the buy-
er every document justifying his ownership of the property, i.e. every former title
of ownership. Generation after generation, because of the possibility for fields or
houses to be gathered or shared, put into pieces or sold as a whole, the property
documents accumulated in files called ṭuppi ummatim u ṭuppât šurdê (“the mother
tablet and the following tablets”). Following the chains of transmission, it is then
possible to go up to the original transaction that caused the property to be, for
the first time, as it is sold in the present time, whether it was formed by gather-
ing some different plots of land or one field was divided into different plots.37
The “mother tablet” records the original acquisition of the good as it exists and
the “following tablets” record each intermediary transaction between that first
acquisition and the present time. Sometimes, one of these tablets is missing and
the seller is asked to write a certificate establishing his own responsibility in case
of a claim against the buyer about this missing document.
The importance attached to the keeping and transmitting of these titles of
property is a sign of how written evidence became important in trials about a
property.38 Complementarity of oral and written evidence is obvious in a lot of
trial records. As a matter of fact, Akkadian language uses the same words to de-
scribe the one and the other and speaks of “the testimony” of a tablet (šîbûtum); it
also speaks of the “mouth of the tablet” (pî ṭuppim) or of the “talking of the tablet”
(awât ṭuppim) to designate its content.39 During the Old Babylonian period, oral
testimony only was no more felt sufficient as proof in a legal case and the collec-
tion of written elements was necessary. Judges can ask in the same case to hear
witnesses and to have tablets read, so that it was felt dodgy to go to trial without
any written evidence of one’s rights, as is shown by the lettre AbB 11 55:40 a nadî-
tum of Šamaš called Narâmtani who lived in Sippar chose to postpone a litigation
about inheritance because she was not in possession of her tablets, which were
kept by a male member of her family, and she knew that she could not defend her
rights without being able to produce them:
Speak to Šamšiya: Thus says Narâmtani, daughter of Ipqatum. May my Lord and my
Mistress (= the gods Šamaš and Aya) keep you in good health for my sake! The inheri-
tance of my paternal uncle’s daughter has been taken, and she gave me her tablets; but
publication of the Ur-Utu archives: see especially Janssen 1992 ; Janssen, Gasche, Tanret 1994,
and Janssen 1996.
37 See Van Lerberghe & Voet 1991 for definitions of what Babylonians called ṭuppi ummatim
and ṭuppât šurdê, and the very clear schematical view of chains of transmission published in
Janssen 1996, p. 243, expecting the forthcoming M. Tanret, C. Janssen, L. Dekiere, Chains of
Transmission: a search through Ur-Utu’s property titles, MHEM 2, Ghent.
38 See Charpin 2008a, p. 145-151 (English version: Charpin 2011, p. 48-52), with bibliography.
39 Charpin 2008a, p. 148 (English: Charpin 2011, p. 50) and the forthcoming Charpin in press b.
40 AbB 11 55: translation by M. Stol, revised according to the French translation and commen-
tary in Charpin 2000a, p. 73-74.
76
as for Nûratum, who had taken her inheritance before me, who had acted against her,
whose expenses had been paid back, and who also had drawn up a tablet renouncing
(any further) claim, today the warkûm-official, interceding for him, is harassing me.
Aliyatum, her sister, released one-half mina of silver from the lap of my paternal
uncle’s daughter and I seized her, but, as I had nobody, she then escaped from me. So
thus I said (to myself): “My tablets are in the hand of my father. As long as my father
does not come here, I will not litigate”. Now, do not neglect me!
Another example of this new attention paid to written evidence is the case record
CT 47 63 dated to the 14th year of Samsu-iluna’s reign in favour of the nadîtum
Amat-Mamu: Amat-Mamu, nadîtum of Šamaš had been adopted by an older na-
dîtum called Belessunu; when Belessunu died, Amat-Mamu received the “mother
tablets” (ṭuppât ummâtim) of the properties of Belessunu which proved, along
with her adoption contract, that she was the legitimate owner of the proper-
ties. Thanks to these tablets, she could defend herself against her cousins who
claimed her properties and were obliged to leave her a tablet renouncing any fur-
ther claim. The whole file was kept, as usual, in the house of a man of her family,
in that case, an uncle of hers. But then, the tablets were lost and Amat-Mamu had
to come before the local court so that judges reconstitute the lost documents (Ak-
kadian language says that they “made the tablet live again”). I quote here only an
extract from this long text:41
By order of Sîn-išmeanni and the assembly of the merchants (kârum) of Sippar, one
has made this tablet “live again”. The tablet of inheritance (tuppi aplûtim), the tablets
of former possessions (tuppi ummâtim) and the tablet renouncing any claim (tuppi la
ragâmim) that Amat-Mamu, daughter of Sîn-ilî, received from Bêlessunu, in the house
of Ikûn-pî-Sîn or wherever they will be seen, they belong to Amat-Mamu, daughter of
Sîn-ilî. In the future, according to the content of this tablet, Ikûn-pî-Sîn, his sons, and
the parents of Bêlessunu, whether men or women, as many as they are, shall not lay
any claim against Amat-Mamu, daughter of Sîn-ilî. They swore by Šamaš, Marduk and
Samsu-iluna the king.
We do not know where and by whom this new record was eventually kept, but
this example of “resurrection” of a lost tablet shows how important it was for
Amat-Mamu to be in possession of a written title establishing her rights over her
goods and protecting her against any further claim42. Things assuredly went the
same way for anybody during the Old Babylonian period.
41 See Charpin 1986, p. 133-135 (revised English version now published as “The Transfer of
Property Deeds and the Constitution of Family Archives”, Charpin 2010, p. 53-69), and, for a
new translation, Charpin 2000a, p. 74-76.
42 See also Charpin in press b, p. 53.
family archives in mesopotamia… 77
3.3. The Organization of Private Archives and the Memory
The last point of this brief survey of Old Babylonian archival documents is about
a particular kind of texts without any sealing, witness nor date (and then assur-
edly invalid before a court) which people however used to keep in their archives.
Most of them are lists and memoranda, often devoid of any key-word. Their mo-
tivation is difficult to understand when they are taken separately. They make
sense only when they can be put back together with the archives to which they
belonged. Their use actually was often to help organize the archives themselves.
The filing of documents within an archive sometimes was the reason to write
other documents.43
The archives of Marduk-muballiṭ in Lagaba provide us with good examples
of this common practice: NBC 8632 is a table listing diverse quantities of barley
(measured in GUR) and silver (measured in GÍN [= shekels]) associated with 19
personal names, 9 of which are unfortunately missing, being lost in a large la-
cuna. It does not display any explicit formula, neither date nor validation mark
(seal impressions, etc.). This text certainly has no legal value and it is difficult to
give it some meaning at the first reading. The data are in Table 2.
In absence of any context, this text could be interpreted either as a list of dis-
bursements of barley and/or silver attributed to 19 persons or as a list of receipts
of barley and/or silver brought by 19 persons. The absence of totals, normally
calculated at the end of this kind of list, speaks against the identification of this
tablet as an accounting document. Once put back within the archives to which it
belongs and compared to another series of data, this recapitulatory list however
sheds light on an interesting archival practice of the Old Babylonian period: 12
loan contracts have indeed been identified in Marduk-muballiṭ’s archive. They
record loans of barley and/or silver by Marduk-muballiṭ to different people and
were supposed to be kept by Marduk-muballiṭ until his debtors reimbursed the
whole amount. They are quite regular legal documents, dated and sealed, men-
tioning the name of the creditor, that of the debtor, and those of the witnesses,
the interest rate and the expiry date. Table 3 recapitulates the whole data sorted
in chronological order.44
43 On the methods of filing of archival texts in Mesopotamia and the various containers used
for conservation of tablets, see the synthesis drawn by K. Veenhof as an introduction to the
30e Rencontre Assyriologique Internationale (Leiden, 1983): Veenhof 1986, especially p. 11-18, with
bibliography.
44 The content of these documents, first studied by O. Tammuz in his unpublished Ph.D.
Dissertation (Tammuz 1993), was used as material for a study by D. Charpin on the influence
of mîšarum-edicts on the archives of private entrepreneurs in the Old Babylonian period; see
Charpin 2000b, especially p. 194 sq. The present table 2 however adds the data of two more do-
cuments: NBC 8533 and NBC 8534 and have been corrected according to collations of the texts:
the date of NBC 8571 is 26/iv/Si 8; the name of the debtor on NBC 6798 is Imdi-Enlil.
78
Table 2: Data recapitulated in NBC 8632
Line Nr. Barley Silver Personal name
2 7 GUR 2 GÍN Imdi-Enlil
3 4 GUR Huzalum
4 1 GUR 1/2 GÍN Ubarum son of Irra-naṣir
5 1 GUR […]
6 1/2 GÍN […]-tim
7 0,3.0 GUR […] the mayor (rabiânum)
8 1 GUR […] the intendant (šatammum)
9 1/3 GÍN 11+ ŠE […-mu]šallim the “gentleman” (awîlum)
10 1/2 GÍN […] […]-lum
11 3 GUR […]
12 2 GUR 3 GÍN […]
13 0,2.0 GUR […]
14 0,2.0 GUR Ipqu-Ištar
15 0,2.0 GUR Addu-tayyar
16 0,2.0 GUR Uṣi-ina-pušqi
17 0,2.0 GUR Sin-imguranni
18 0,2.0 GUR Ubarum
19-20 1 1/2 GÍN Sin-iddinam son of […]
21 1 GÍN Addu-ilum
Table 3: Catalogue of the loan contracts of barley and silver in the archives of Marduk-
muballiṭ of Lagaba (sorted by chronological order)
Text Barley Silver Debtor Date
NBC 8570 3 GUR Ṭab-wašabšu 1/xi/Si 5
NBC 8874 1/2 GÍN Ili-u-Šamaš 13/xi/Si 5
NBC 8564 2 GUR Ea-tukulti 23/ii/Si 6
NBC 8744 1 GUR 1/2 GÍN Ubarum son of Irra-naṣir 17/v/Si 7
NBC 8568 3 GUR Šamaš-nur-matim son of Šamaš-naṣir 11/vi/Si 7
NBC 6798 7 GUR 2 GÍN Imdi-Enlil 5/xi/Si 7
NBC 6752 2 GUR 3 GÍN Šerum-ili son of Nur-Kabta 1/xii/Si 7
NBC 8768 1/4 GÍN Huzalum 20/xii/Si 7
NBC 8571 1 GUR Ubarum 26/iv/Si 8
NBC 8533 0,3.2 GUR Girni-isa 10/vi/Si 8
NBC 6827 2 GUR 1 GÍN Huzalum 1/vii/Si 8
NBC 8534 1 GUR 1 1/4 GÍN Gimil-Gula -/i/Si 9
family archives in mesopotamia… 79
Comparing both series of data, several points can be underlined (highlighted in
the tables above):
– line 2 of NBC 8632 is an exact parallel to the data of the loan contract NBC
6798, recording the loan of 7 GUR of barley and 2 shekels of silver by Marduk-
muballiṭ to Imdi-Enlil dated to 5/xi/Samsu-iluna 7.
– the name of Huzalum recorded in line 3 of NBC 8632 appears as debtor’s
name in two loan contracts of the same series, NBC 8768 (20/xii/Samsu-iluna
7) and NBC 6827 (1/vii/Samsu-iluna 8) with different quantities.
– line 4 of NBC 8632 is exactly parallel to NBC 8744, recording the loan of 1 GUR
of barley and 1/2 shekel of silver by Marduk-muballiṭ to Ubarum, son of Irra-
naṣir dated to 17/v/Samsu-iluna 7.
– in line 12 of NBC 8632, the personal name is missing but the quantities are
the same as in NBC 6752, a loan contract of barley and silver to Šerum-ili, son
of Nur-Kabta (1/xii/Samsu-iluna 7).
– other names lost in the lacunae of NBC 8632 might also have corresponded to
people known as debtors in other loan contracts.
These few parallels do suffice to state that we are dealing with a recapitulatory
list of debts to be recovered by Marduk-muballiṭ.45 It does not aim at substituting
for the sealed documents, which were kept beside it. It must have corresponded
to another purpose and may have helped Marduk-muballiṭ know in a glance the
content of a coffer or basket of tablets in which he kept those texts. It remains to
be seen why these texts were filed together and recapitulated once for all on that
record without any indication of the nature of the recorded documents. It has to
be noticed that the only loan contracts that have been identified with certainty as
parallels to NBC 8632 were dated to the 7th year of Samsu-iluna (months v, xi and
maybe xii). The loans they record are likely to have been cancelled by the edict of
mîšarum of iii/Samsu-iluna 8.46 NBC 8632 may thus be a recapitulatory list of the
arrears of cancelled loan contracts that Marduk-muballiṭ knew he would never
recover because of the royal edict.47 He of course did not need to write down the
nature of the texts: he knew too well what the basket or coffer contained, if, as
45 This is not the only known example of this practice in Old Babylonian archives; see for in-
stance AUCT 5 99, a recapitulatory list of loans made by Ibni-Amurrum which D. Charpin man-
aged to link with 5 original contracts (AUCT 5 41 and 43; BBVOT 1 38, 40 and 48); see Charpin
2005, p. 417 and 2008b, p. 11.
46 Charpin 2000b, p. 195.
47 Some of the loan contracts had apparently not been reimbursed at all, as it is clear for
NBC 6798, 8744 and maybe 6752; some lines of NBC 8632 may however record total amounts
of several contracts or arrears of loans already partially recovered, which would explain the dif-
ferences in quantities, for instance, as for known loans by Huzalum.
80
I assume, he had lost 22 GUR of barley (maybe about 6600 liters) and about 10
shekel of silver (about 80 grams)!48
For the sake of completeness, a letter belonging to the archives of Marduk-
muballiṭ has to be quoted. It was sent from Babylon by Sagil-mansum to Marduk-
muballiṭ and mentions the existence of another recapitulatory list of loan con-
tracts, probably to be also linked with the edict of mišârum of Samsu-iluna 8:49
(1-3) Speak to Marduk-muballiṭ: Thus says Sagil-mansum. (4) May Šamaš and Marduk
grant you good health! (5-6) The basket of tablets for which I am responsible, open it
before Apil-Ea and (7-11) the sealed tablet (that says): “1 mina and 1 1/2 shekel of silver,
[…] of gold, dated to ‘the year of the images of suppliants’ (= Samsu-iluna 6), ‘the year of
the powerful weapon’ (= Samsu-iluna 7) and ‘the year of the royal stall’ (= Samsu-iluna
8), that is of 3 years, received by So-and-So, (12-15) that have been given to be recovered
by Munawwirum, the chair-carrier” – that is how it is inscribed – (16-18) that sealed
tablet, have it brought to me to Babylon.
A series of loan contracts have been accumulated by Sagil-mansum during years
6, 7 and 8 of Samsu-iluna. They were then entrusted by Sagil-mansum to Munaw-
wirum to be recovered.50 This agreement led to write a sealed tablet, the one that
Sagil-mansum speaks about in his letter, which was kept in a basket along with
other business papers of Sagil-mansum and deposited at Marduk-muballiṭ’s as
Sagil-mansum left Lagaba to reside, at least temporarily, in Babylon. One can im-
agine that, when Samsu-iluna proclaimed his edict in month iii of his 3rd year of
reign, Sagil-mansum may have intended to get paid by Munawwirum who, as a
recoverer (mušaddinum), had become responsible for the reimbursement of the
loans. This is why Sagil-mansum may have asked that Marduk-muballiṭ had the
sealed tablet brought to him to Babylon.51
48 Another question is about the status of loan contracts dated sometimes long after the proc-
lamation of the mîšarum edict and whether they were not supposed to compensate the loss of
former amounts, cancelled by the edict ; both dossiers (Marduk-muballiṭ around NBC 8632 and
Ibni-Amurrum around AUCT 5 99) indeed contain texts dated to several months following the
mîšarum of iii/Si 8, and in the case of Marduk-muballiṭ, even 10 months later (NBC 8534 dated
to -/i/Si 9); the fact that these texts were found together with the discarded contracts would
rather indicate that they were never recovered and were cancelled too; see the discussion in
Charpin 2000b, p. 197, with other references.
49 YOS 15 38 (NBC 6290); see Charpin 2000b, p. 195 and n. 36.
50 Mari provides us with a nice parallel of such a recapitulatory list: M.15119+M.15287 is a list
of unrecovered loan contracts found in the house of the princess Inibšina, that were entrusted
to Šubnalu to be recovered. The list itself is not sealed, but it was established in presence of the
king and it ends with these words (l. 58-60): “Šubnalu received 2 sealed tablets, copy of the pre-
sent tablet, to be recovered”; see Charpin 2008b.
51 D. Charpin gives another explanation (Charpin 2000b, p.195): «Bien que la lettre ne le dise
pas explicitement, il est évident que suite à la mîšarum du mois iii de l’an 8 de Samsu-iluna,
l’affaire est annulée; d’où la demande de Sagil-mansum que le contrat avec Munawwirum lui
parvienne à Babylone». I do not understand why, in case of a cancellation of the agreement
with the mušaddinum, he would have needed to have his sealed document at hand: he could
family archives in mesopotamia… 81
Both examples show how filing and manipulation of archival documents caused
to write other documents describing their content and containers. Letters them-
selves, at least in private context, could have been preserved as memoranda in
order to give sense to a file of documents and keep a trace of a decision or of an
order that led to write or preserve other texts. Both examples also help measure
once again the gap that exists between the number of loans that were actually
written and the number of those which have come to us: among 19 texts recorded
in NBC 8632, 2 texts were identified with certainty and a third one according
to an hypothetical restoration. As for the loan contracts of silver mentioned in
Sagil-mansum’s letter, they never came to us.52 Other loan contracts recorded
or mentioned in both texts may either have been broken in antiquity after the
debt had eventually been reimbursed, or destroyed in the ground waiting to
be discovered, forgotten by the digger or scattered on the antique market. The
representativeness of the samples we deal with always has to be questioned be-
fore using them as material for quantitative studies.53
Conclusion
This paper has tried to demonstrate that, however important it is to refine typo-
logical distinctions in order to get a better understanding of archival documents
taken separately, the major progress in assyriological studies will come from
analysing private archives as a whole, when they have been luckily unearthed
during regular excavations, or from gathering and (re)constructing them, file
after file, by confronting and trying to make sense with documents of different
natures. This is how the Archibab project intends to get a better understanding
of phenomena that led to an increasing production, conservation, and use of pri-
vate archives at the beginning of the 2nd millennium B.C. in Mesopotamia.
have simply let it sleep as a discarded document in his archives in Lagaba. The claim would
anyway only be legal if the recovery had already been processed before the proclamation of the
mîšarum for someone intending to recover a debt after the mîšarum would incur death penalty.
52 NBC 8723 dated to the 5th year of Samsu-iluna was surely not recapitulated in the tablet
mentionned in YOS 15 38: by this contract, Sagil-mansum lent silver to Ṣilli-Šamaš so that he
could buy him a female donkey within 10 days (18/vi-bis/Si 5).
53 It is also possible that not every loan recorded on NBC 8632 led to a written contract; small
loans of barley recorded at ll. 13-18 may have for instance led only to an oral agreement beween
people who knew each other. Studying AUCT 5 99 mentioned above, D. Charpin indeed notes
(Charpin 2008b, p. 11): «Il convient de souligner qu’aucune des 13 créances en nature (…) énu-
mérées dans la deuxième partie de AUCT 5 99 n’a été retrouvée; vu la modestie des montants
en jeu (aux alentours de 1 qa), elles n’ont sans doute pas fait l’objet d’un contrat écrit. La conclu-
sion est très importante; tant ce texte de AUCT 5 que le texte de Mari montrent que les prêts
pouvaient très bien ne pas faire l’objet de la rédaction d’une créance. Cela limite encore plus les
conclusions quantitatives qu’on peut tirer d’un point de vue économique des créances qui ont
été retrouvées (…)».
82
References Barberon 2003 Charpin 2000a
L. Barberon, Le mari, sa femme D. Charpin, Lettres et procès
et leurs biens: une approche de la paléo-babyloniens, in: F. Joannès
dot dans les rapports patrimoniaux (ed.), Rendre la justice en
du couple en Mésopotamie Mésopotamie. Archives judiciaires
d’après la documentation paléo- du Proche-Orient ancien (IIIe-Ier
babylonienne, «RHD» 81/1, millénaires avant J.-C.), Saint-
p. 1-14. Denis, p. 69-111.
Barberon 2009 Charpin 2000b
L. Barberon, Les documents D. Charpin, Les prêteurs et le
d’archives des religieuses en palais: les édits de mîšarum des
Babylonie ancienne. Usage, rois de Babylone et leurs traces
transmission et conservation, in: dans les archives privées, in:
Briquel-Chatonnet et alii 2009, A. C. V. M. Bongenaar (ed.),
p. 273-288. Interdependency of Institutions
and Private Entrepreneurs.
Briquel-Chatonnet et alii 2009
Proceedings of the Second MOS
F. Briquel-Chatonnet, S.
Symposium (Leiden 1998),
Farès, B. Lion, C. Michel (ed.),
PIHANS 87, Leiden,
Femmes, cultures et sociétés dans
p. 185-211.
les civilisations méditerranéennes
et proche-orientales de l’Antiquité, Charpin 2004
«Topoi» Suppl. 10, Lyon. D. Charpin, Histoire politique du
Proche-Orient amorrite (2002-
Charpin 1984
1595), in: Mesopotamien. Die
D. Charpin, Une pratique
altbabylonische Zeit, (= P. Attinger,
administrative méconnue,
W. Sallaberger & M. Wäfler
«MARI. Annales de Recherches
[ed.], Annäherungen 4), OBO
interdisciplinaires» 3,
160/4, Fribourg/Göttingen,
p. 258-259.
p. 25-480.
Charpin 1986
Charpin 2005
D. Charpin, Transmission des
D. Charpin, Données nouvelles
titres de propriété et constitution
sur la vie économique et sociale
des archives privées en Babylonie
de l’époque paléo-babylonienne,
ancienne, in: K. R. Veenhof (ed.),
«Orientalia» 74, p. 409-421.
Cuneiform Archives and Libraries.
Papers read at the 30e Rencontre Charpin 2007
Assyriologique Internationale D. Charpin, Économie, société et
Leiden, 4-8 July 1983, PIHANS 57, institutions paléo-babyloniennes:
Leiden, p. 121-140 nouvelles sources, nouvelles
approches, «RA» 101, p. 147-182.
Charpin 1996
D. Charpin, Maisons et Charpin 2008a
maisonnées en Babylonie ancienne D. Charpin, Lire et écrire à
de Sippar à Ur. Remarques Babylone, Paris (English version
sur les grandes demeures des now available as Charpin
notables paléo-babyloniens, in: 2010a).
K. R. Veenhof (ed.), Houses
Charpin 2008b
and Households in Ancient
D. Charpin, Archivage et
Mesopotamia. Papers read at the
40e Rencontre Assyriologique classification: un récapitulatif de
créances à Mari sous Zimrî-Lîm,
Internationale, Leiden, July 5-8,
in: R. D. Biggs, J. Myers & M.
1993, PIHANS 78, Leiden,
T. Roth (ed.), Proceedings of
p. 221-228.
family archives in mesopotamia… 83
the 51st Rencontre Assyriologique Joannès (ed.), La circulation des (ed.), Sex and Gender in the
Internationale held at the Oriental biens, des personnes et des idées Ancient Near East. Proceedings of
Institute of the University of dans le Proche-Orient ancien, the 47th Rencontre Assyriologique
Chicago July 18-22, 2005, SAOC 62, Actes de la XXXVIIIe Rencontre Internationale, Helsinki, July 2-6,
Chicago, 2008, p. 1-13. Assyriologique Internationale 2001. Part I-II, Helsinki.
(Paris, 8-10 juillet 1991), Paris,
Charpin 2010a Postgate 1992
p. 97-128.
D. Charpin, Reading and Writing J. N. Postgate, Early
in Babylon, Cambridge [Mass.]. Durand 2004 Mesopotamia. Society and
J.-M. Durand, Peuplement et Economy at the Dawn of History,
Charpin 2010b
sociétés à l’époque amorrite. (I) Les London/New York.
D. Charpin, Writing, Law, and
clans bensim’alites, in: C. Nicolle
Kingship in Old Babylonian Sallaberger 2007
(ed.), Nomades et sédentaires en
Mesopotamia, Chicago/London. W. Sallaberger, From Urban
Mésopotamie. Compte rendu de
la XLVIe Rencontre Assyriologique Culture to Nomadism: A History
Charpin in press a
of Upper Mesopotamia in the Late
Internationale (Paris, 10-13 juillet
D. Charpin, The Historian and
Third Millennium, in: C. Marro
2000), Amurru 3, Paris, p. 111-198.
the Old Babylonian Archives, in:
and C. Kuzucuoglu (ed.),
M. Jursa et al. (ed.), Too much
Janssen 1992 Sociétés humaines et changement
data? Generalizations and model-
C. Janssen, Inanna-mansum et climatique à la fin du Troisième
building in ancient economic
ses fils: relation d’une succession millénaire: Une crise a-t-elle eu
history on the basis of large corpora
turbulente dans les archives d’Ur- lieu en Haute Mésopotamie, Varia
of documentary evidence (Wien,
Utu, «RA» 86, p. 19-52. Anatolica 19, Istanbul & Paris,
17-19 July 2008) [French version
p. 417-456.
“L’historien face aux archives Janssen 1996
paléo-babyloniennes” to be C. Janssen, When the House Tanret 2004
downloaded at http://www. is on Fire and the Children are M. Tanret, The Works and the
digitorient.com/?p=190]. gone, in: K. R. Veenhof (ed.), Days… On Scribal Activity in Old
Houses and Households in Ancient Babylonian Sippar-Amnānum,
Charpin in press b
Mesopotamia. Papers read at the «RA» 98, p. 33-62.
D. Charpin, “Garde ma lettre 40e Rencontre Assyriologique
en témoignage”. Le rôle de la Tanret 2008
Internationale, Leiden, July 5-8,
correspondance dans le système M. Tanret, Find the Tablet-box…
1993, PIHANS 78, Leiden,
juridique mésopotamien de la New Aspects of Archive-Keeping in
p. 237-246.
première moitié du deuxième Old Babylonian Sippar-Amnānum,
millénaire av. n. è., in: U. Yiftach- Janssen, Gasche, Tanret 1994 in: R. van der Speck (ed.), Studies
Firanko (ed.), The Letter: Law, C. Janssen, H. Gasche, M. in Ancient Near Eastern World
State, Society and the Epistolary Tanret, Du chantier à la tablette. View and Society, Presented to
Format in the Ancient World. Ur-Utu et l’histoire de sa maison à Marten Stol on the Occasion of His
Proceedings of a Colloquium Sippar-Amnānum, in: H. Gasche, 65th Birthday, 10 November 2005,
held at the American Academy in M. Tanret, C. Janssen, A. and His Retirement from the Vrije
Rome (28-30.9.2008), Philippika, Degraeve (ed.), Cinquante-deux Universiteit Amsterdam, Bethesda,
Wiesbaden, p. 45-60. réflexions sur le Proche-Orient 2008, p. 131-147.
ancien offertes en hommage à
Durand 1987 Van Lerberghe & Voet 1991
Léon De Meyer, MHEO 2, Ghent,
J.-M. Durand (ed.), La Femme K. Van Lerberghe, G. Voet, On
91-123.
dans le Proche-Orient antique. “Quasi-Hüllentafeln”, «NAPR»
Compte rendu de la XXXIIIe Michalowski 2001 6, p. 3-8.
Rencontre Assyriologique P. Michalowski, The
Vanstiphout 1995
Internationale (Paris, 7-10 juillet Correspondence of the Kings of Ur.
H. Vanstiphout, Memory
1986), Paris. An Epistolary History of an Ancient
and Literacy in Ancient Western
Mesopotamian Kingdom, MC 15,
Durand 1992 Asia, in: J. M. Sasson et al.,
Winona Lake.
J.-M. Durand, Unité et diversités Civilizations of the Ancient Near
au Proche-Orient à l’époque Parpola & Whiting 2002 East 4, p. 2181-2196.
amorrite, in: D. Charpin, F. S. Parpola, R. M. Whiting
84
Veenhof 1986
K. R. Veenhof, Cuneiform
Archives. An Introduction, in:
K. R. Veenhof (ed.), Cuneiform
Archives and Libraries. Papers read
at the 30e Rencontre Assyriologique
Internationale Leiden, 4-8 July
1983, PIHANS 57, Leiden, p. 1-36.
Veenhof 1995
K. R. Veenhof, Old Assyrian
i(cid:787)urtum, Akkadian eṣērum and
Hittite GIŠ.(cid:730)UR, in: Th. van
den Hout & J. de Roos (ed.),
Studio Historiae Ardens. Ancient
Near Eastern Studies Presented to
Philo H. J. Houwink ten Cate on
the Occasion of his 65th Birthday,
PIHANS 74, Leiden,
p. 311-332.
Wilcke 1979
C. Wilcke, Review of: A. L.
Oppenheim, Letters from
Mesopotamia, Chicago/London,
1967, «ZA» 60, p. 165-167.
Wilcke 2001
N. Wilcke, Gestion et contrôle
d’après les archives du palais
de Mari (XVIIIe siècle av. J.-C.),
«Ktèma» 26, p. 63-72.
family archives in mesopotamia… 85

# FIGURE

# BIBLIOGRAPHY

