# METADATA
author: Lucas
source_id:Lucas1979_TheScribal
title: The Scribal Tablet House In Ancient Mesopotamia
Year: 1979
Source_ID:  Lucas1979_TheScribal
Source_Type: Article in Book: History of Education Quarterly, Autumn, 1979, Vol. 19, No. 3
Pages: pp. 305-332

# TEXT

The Scribal Tablet-House in Ancient Mesopotamia
Author(s): Christopher J. Lucas
Source: History of Education Quarterly, Autumn, 1979, Vol. 19, No. 3 (Autumn, 1979),
pp. 305-332
Published by: Cambridge University Press
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/367648
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
https://about.jstor.org/terms
Cambridge University Press is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access
to History of Education Quarterly
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)202.47.36.85 on Sun, 14 Nov 2021 14:23:30 UTC(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
The Scribal Tablet-House in
Ancient Mesopotamia
CHRISTOPHER J. LUCAS
THE PIVOTAL ROLE of the scribe in the development of Mesopotam-
ian culture can scarcely be exaggerated. His was the cohesive force that
helped preserve and enrich one of mankind's very earliest civilizations
throughout its long historical career, that impressed upon it its unique
form and character, and that maintained and revitalized its vast body of
traditions, customs, and ideals over the span of almost three millennia,
doing so in spite of repeated social, political, and intellectual changes.
With the deployment of the first practical system of writing-an innova-
tion which obviously lent societal mores a permanence and continuity
heretofore lacking-the scribe emerged early as a central figure in the
workings of Mesopotamia. Thus armed with a means of fixing thought on
clay, it was inevitable perhaps that the tablet-writer should come to oc-
cupy a strategic position in his several roles as temple functionary, court
secretary, royal counselor, civil bureaucrat, commercial correspondent,
poet, and scholar. The role and importance of the tupsarru, it has been
rightly observed, might be likened to those of the clergy in medieval
Europe; his lore, tupsarrutu, to that extensive body of knowledge, skills,
and savoir-faire covered by the Islamic term adab. (1) Any holistic ap-
preciation for the Mesopotamian cradle of civilization, arguably, will ac-
cord pre-eminence to the scribe and his craft in ancient Near Eastern
society.
Traditional Assyriological scholarship, it must be said, has been duly
cognizant of the practical and literary achievements of the Mesopotamian
scribe, and has explored in some detail the scribal contribution to the his-
torical evolution of both form and content in the extant - albeit fragmen-
tary-corpus of Sumero-Akkadian and Babylonian literature. Less well
developed, however, (with a few notable exceptions) has been concern
and appreciation for the pedagogic means whereby scribes were prepared
for their vocation, the institutions in which their training and subsequent
scholarly endeavor were conducted, the character of those documents
employed as objects of study, and, generally, the nature, content, and or-
ganization of formal school curricula. This is to say that while the appli-
ChristopherJ. Lucas is Professor of Education at the University of Missouri-Columbia.
Fall 1979 305
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)202.47.36.85 on Sun, 14 Nov 2021 14:23:30 UTC(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
cation of scribal craft has been analyzed and celebrated at length, the set-
ting within which scribes mastered their lore has received rather less
systematic attention than it deserves.
I.
The historical priority of organized instruction in the wadi arzjfidan or
"twin rivers basin" of the Tigris and Euphrates seems virtually incontesta-
ble. Whereas the existence of formal learning institutions is highly proba-
ble but as yet unconfirmed for Egypt of the Middle Kingdom (c. 1900
B.C.), for example, or in the still more remote yet literate Harappa and
Mohenjo-Daro cultures of the Indus Valley (c. 2500 B.C.), culture-sites in
lower Iraq attest to what might justifiably be termed the "first" schools in
recorded history. (2) Surviving texts together with other archaeological
remains point to the existence of schools in Mesopotamia at least by Old
Babylonian times (c. 2000 B.C.) and most likely several centuries before.
There can be little doubt that by the time of Hammurabi in the mid-
eighteenth century, at any rate, scribal institutions of learning were flour-
ishing all along the axis of the al-Jartrah or "island" formed by the twin
rivers, from modern Baghdad southeastward down toward the Shatt 'el-
Arab.
Some of the factors responsible for the early emergence of schools in
Mesopotamia are not difficult to divine. The documented prevalence of
large-scale cereal agriculture in many areas (supplemented extensively by
horticulture and animal husbandry) must have necessitated a developed
"storage economy," complete with ways for recording wages and rations,
registering land titles and rentals, crop payments, the transfer of other
staples and materials, and similar transactions. At the center of this com-
plex economic circulation system stood the temple, which served also as
the pivot of the larger social and political order. These autarchic "landed
sanctuaries" or cultic preserves would have been supported by extensive
land holdings and serfs, organized ostensibly to provide an adequately
maintained abode for the divine presence. Insofar as the temple likewise
functioned as the prime regulator of trade and commerce, not to mention
its sponsorship of public works, it would have been the first institution to
stand in need of a literate class of administrators. Writing fragments un-
covered from the archaic temple of E-Anna in Uruk, to cite a case in
point, reveal the presence of such a literate class well before the mid-
point of the third millennium, and further open up the possibility of or-
ganized instruction conducted under temple auspices. (3) Overall, it
can be assumed that the invention of cuneiform sometime around the end
of the fourth millennium was at once the necessary and sufficient condi-
tion for the emergence of a literate bureaucracy; and the scribal class, in
turn, represented a logical response to the need for efficient record-keep-
ing within ever-increasingly elaborate systems of administrative control.
Still another factor supportive of the growth of a scribal class and hence
306 HISTORY OF EDUCATION QUARTERLY
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)202.47.36.85 on Sun, 14 Nov 2021 14:23:30 UTC(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
of schools was the rise of the royal court as a major center of power. Meso-
potamian courts, no less than temples, required the service of literate bu-
reaucrats for conducting affairs of state, and, correlatively, schools of
some sort in which to train scribes for their work. From the many eco-
nomic, administrative, political, and literary tablets recovered so far, it is
obvious that the number of scribes who practiced their craft in the service
of temple and court from Sumerian times onward must have run into the
thousands. (4) The earliest Sumerian word for scribe is umbisag; the
later, more common term was dubsar (Akkadian: tupsarru, or "tablet-
writer"). There were "junior" and "high" scribes, liturgical and cultic
functionaries, administrative factotums, and court retainers who served
as ranking officials in the upper echelon of the royal bureaucracy. Others
were employed as private secretaries or commercial copyists, but only in
later periods. A partial list of occupational titles, each position carefully
designated in both Sumerian and Akkadian, indicates an elaborate sys-
tem of differentiation by rank and specialization. (5) Included are the
notary or seal inscriber (musar = musarru), the land surveyor or registrar
(asdgu = sasukku), the military recorder (kilu ubgarra = tupsarr um-
mani), the writer and stele engraver (kabsar = kapsarru), the "district"
scribe (arua), the copyist (gestula = sukkuku), the court advisor
(umunak = tupsarr assuru), the secretary (Old Babylonian: zagga =
zazakku), the common scribe for laborer groups (erinna = tupsarr sabe),
and several classes of lesser clerks (imma).
Precious little is known of the social position and influence of tablet-
writers as a class. Fragmentary evidence dating from Ur III (c. 2113-2006
B.C.), however, indicates that the dubsars considered themselves mem-
bers of an intellectual elite (dumu gir), and perhaps justifiably so. Un-
doubtedly the high scarcity value of literacy translated into special stand-
ing, as suggested by the scribal boast that they alone were fit to dispense
counsel (nadzga = masartu) to kings and other members of the reigning
aristocracy. Generally speaking, if the literati were not themselves mem-
bers of the ruling class, at least they enjoyed the patronage and respect of
the rich and powerful. (6)
Letters addressed to kings or to their scribes illustrate forcefully the im-
portance of the court scribe or royal secretary. (7) Virtually all corre-
spondence addressed to or emanating from the monarch-edicts, direc-
tives, battle orders, royal inscriptions, diplomatic communications, and
so forth-passed through the hands of the copyist. In his capacity as offi-
cial correspondent, the scribe therefore exercised enormous control over
the flow of information to and from the palace, the vital link between a
ruler and the world outside his court. Nor did the secretary's role as ar-
biter go unacknowledged. Oftentimes those who addressed messages to
the royal person appended a separate request that the scribal mediator
take special pains to convey the exact message intended or to speak favor-
ably on the author's behalf in submitting the tablet before the throne.
Fall 1979 307
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)202.47.36.85 on Sun, 14 Nov 2021 14:23:30 UTC(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
Occasionally duplicate copies of official missives were dispatched to the
royal secretary; sometimes negotiations were conducted exclusively be-
tween scribes of different courts. Also common were elaborate invoca-
tions of divine blessings upon the scribal recipient rather than upon the
person to whom the letter was officially addressed.
Precisely when the school as a discrete institution developed of course is
problematic. In light of the high degree of institutional articulation char-
acteristic of the Sumero-Akkadian states, however, it is probable that
some systematic provision for the transmission of literacy skills must have
been made attendant upon large-scale employment of scribes within the
social economy. Again, the considerable number of tablets tentatively
identified as school "textbooks" excavated at Shuruppak hint at the oper-
ation of schools at least by the mid-point of the third millennium. What-
ever the truth of the matter, a few centuries thereafter the issue is no
longer in doubt. The appearance of schools in large numbers around
2000 B.C. came at a particularly critical juncture, at a time when the po-
litical center of gravity was shifting northward from Ur to Isin and Larsa,
then to Babylon, ultimately the seat of a vast new imperium. As the sec-
ond millennium opened, domination by Amoritic Babylonians was well
advanced throughout the region formerly divided up among the separate
city-states of ancient Sumer and Akkad. The advent of Babylonian
hegemony brought with it major changes: an enormous expansion of the
political horizons of Mesopotamia, a concomitant influx of foreign influ-
ence, and, most significantly, a shift from the Sumerian language to an
Akkadian dialect as the vernacular medium of communication. In conse-
quence, Old Babylonian supremacy clearly spelled the possibility of a
cultural rupture with the past. Behind Babylon loomed a full thousand
years of history, extending from the Early Dynastic age of the pre-Sar-
gonic city-states (c. 2800 B.C.) down through the brilliant if short-lived
"Neo-Sumerian" renaissance of the Third Dynasty of Ur in the period im-
mediately preceding. To the schools of the succeeding Isin-Larsa and
Babylon I Dynasty fell the monumental task of mediating and shaping
this Sumero-Akkadian cultural legacy, re-casting it in a form adopted to
a substantially altered social milieu. (8)
The fruits of a many-sided cultural florescence which had blossomed
forth at the time of the leadership of Isin and Larza was an array of Su-
merian literary works, an increasing number of lexical and grammatical
compilations for the teaching of Sumerian (furnished with interlinear Ak-
kadian translations), and the beginnings of a separate body of Akkadian
literature. The challenge confronting scribal scholars of the Babylon I pe-
riod was not simply to assemble the Sumerian texts of the past and thus
maintain, as it were, the "stream of the tradition," but beyond this to ex-
tend that literature in the Akkadian tongue-now employed more and
more for literary purposes, as distinct from the more utilitarian uses to
which it had been put under the kings of the Dynasty of Akkad. Con-
308 HISTORY OF EDUCATION QUARTERLY
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)202.47.36.85 on Sun, 14 Nov 2021 14:23:30 UTC(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
sidering the singular durability of Mesopotamian culture, it may not be
too much to credit the literati of the Babylonian scrzitoria for having suc-
ceeded in their historic mission and so contributing to the remarkable
cultural continuity Mesopotamia was to evidence thereafter -continuing
as it did well into Achaemenian and Seleucid times. (9)
At the risk of some oversimplification, it may be observed that two dis-
tinct strains evolved within the literary tradition. One was comprised by
the sort of informal, non-canonical literature in which the artistic aspira-
tions of the poet, the ideologies of the political writer, and the novel the-
ories of the scholar materialized. The other, deriving from the first, was a
more or less fixed assemblage of texts which became the mainstay of the
educational system. (10) Upon this latter collection of documents de-
pends most of the data presently available concerning the work of those
scribes who were neither temple nor court officiants, but who served
rather as professional pedagogues in the Mesopotamian school. What is
plain is that virtually nowhere else from antiquity do writing tablets pre-
serve in so complete a fashion or with quite so much vivid detail the par-
ticulars of those archetypal institutions of learning within which the task
of cultural preservation and transmission was carried out.
II.
The Sumerian word for "school" was edubba or e-dub-ba-a, and was
rendered in the Akkadian language as bit-tuppi, literally, "tablet-house."
(11) Apart from so-called Lesestucke or "school compositions," (to be
considered momentarily) which were themselves likely employed in class-
room instruction, direct textual references to the Babylonian edubba are
to be found chiefly in letters of correspondence dating to the opening of
the second millennium, and in a few royal hymns of the same period in
which kings sometimes mention their formal education. Literacy was still
a noteworthy accomplishment, furnishing the subject of much royal
boasting. Thus the speaker in one such hymnal narrative recounts, "Since
I was a child (I was in) the edubba, and on the tablets of Sumer and Akkad
I learned the scribal art; of the young, no one could write a tablet like me;
in the place of wisdom (where) the scribal art (is learned) people . . . (frag-
ment missing); I am perfectly able to subtract and add, (skilled in) count-
ing and accounting; the fair Nanibgal, Nisaba, has lavishly provided me
with wisdom and intelligence; I am an 'open' scribe . . . am I." (12)
A second reference to the school appears subsequently (lines 311-315)
in the same royal hymn: "May the scribe stand ready for my prayer in the
Ekur (i.e., the Temple of Enlil, in Nippur) . . . may he take it in his hand
(i.e., record it); may the singer (or narrator) stand ready for it and per-
form it; in the edubba it will never be changed; in the place of learning it
will never cease." (13) The first passage is instructive, both for its identi-
fication of the "tablet-house" as a "place of wisdom" where scribes were
trained, and for its indirect references to the teaching of writing and
Fall 1979 309
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)202.47.36.85 on Sun, 14 Nov 2021 14:23:30 UTC(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
mathematics. The second excerpt likewise characterizes the edubba as a
"place of learning," and implies that one of the duties of a palace scribe
was to attend at liturgical observances, recording for posterity the mon-
arch's obeisance before the temple god. The latter text further suggests
that royal petitions were preserved in a fixed canonical form within the
scribal school and were studied by successive generations of scholars.
Quite probably the tablet-house also was a place where hymns and other
important literary documents were composed originally, or having been
handed down in an oral tradition, were first committed to written form.
(14)
At least two Old Babylonian letters make reference to a formal educa-
tional institution. "Instruct him (my son) to go to school," writes a parent
to his son's teacher, "watch over his hand (writing) and help him."
(15) The second alludes to schooling in the context of a brief message
passed between a teacher and student: "I entered the tablet-house and
read (the composition beginning with) 'ga-nu,' correcting the tablet of
'ga-nu' which you left." (16)
Scattered allusions to the bit tuppi are found from later periods as well.
One such reference dates to the post-Old Babylonian era when the god
Nabu had replaced the goddess Nisaba as a scribal patron, though it does
not necessarily indicate that the scribal school was still functioning: "The
son of Bel (Nabu) (goes) from the bit tuppi to (the place) where he lives as
master." (17) Another textual source, somewhat more "literary" or
"poetic" in character, appears on a cuneiform tablet fragment from
Boghazkoy: "You shall mix urine from a donkey with clay from (the) bit
tuppi." (18) There are similarly oblique references to schools and in-
struction in a Hittite source and again in a text dating to the Kassite pe-
riod (c. 1600-1200 B.C.). In neither case, however, do the passages in
question demonstrate the actual existence of the tablet-house in these
later centuries. (19) Generally speaking, the edubba or bit tuppi as an
institutional type was distinctive of the Old Babylonian period, and seems
to have been supplanted in later periods by private or tutorial instruction.
(20)
Extant school literature supplies no physical description of the Baby-
lonian tablet-house, only brief allusions to the streets outside, where a pu-
pil is cautioned not to loiter; to a gate through which students passed to
and fro; and to a courtyard within which oral interrogations or examina-
tions were sometimes held. The only specific reference to a building as
such is contained within a somewhat enigmatic Sumerian riddle of inde-
terminate vintage. "A house with a foundation like heaven," it reads, "a
house which like a . . . vessel has been covered with linen; a house which
like a goose stands on a (firm) base; one with eyes not opened has entered
it; one with open eyes has come out of it. Its solution: a school." (21) The
metaphorical sense of opened eyes in the latter portion seems clear
enough. The school's purpose is to convert one who is ignorant and illiter-
310 HISTORY OF EDUCATION QUARTERLY
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)202.47.36.85 on Sun, 14 Nov 2021 14:23:30 UTC(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
ate into a person of wisdom and learning. Otherwise the text is obscure
and offers nothing suggestive of the school's actual appearance. The anal-
ogy with a linen-covered vessel might mean a fly screen. Or possibly it
could refer to an awning or tent-like apparatus overhead to shield the
school's occupants from the glaring sun, after the fashion of roof shades
still found in use on some dwellings throughout the Middle East. Ob-
viously, in the absence of further evidence even so tentative an interpreta-
tion must remain purely conjectural. So too as regards the school's foun-
dation and its standings on a firm base-without the means for judging
whether the meaning intended is literal or metaphorical, the text is
unhelpful. For more detailed information about the school edifice and its
furnishings, physical artifacts have proven far more revealing. For-
tunately, archaeological sites plausibly identified as schools, complete
with classroom apparatus, are fairly numerous.
Common to practically every find are the scattered, frequently-broken
remnants of baked clay tablets inscribed with word lists for study and
practice writing. A specimen typically will bear on one side a short model
sentence (or in some cases a longer literary passage) prepared by a
teacher. A more or less crude facsimile will appear on the obverse side,
strongly suggestive of some young schoolboy's struggle to master the in-
tricacies of cuneiform writing. (22) The calligraphy varies greatly, from
the accomplished hand of an experienced writer to copywork recording a
novice's first faltering application of wedged stylus to clay. Besides simple
word lists and elementary syllabic exercises, school tablets recovered to
date bear geographical place-name lists, syllabaries, mathematical tab-
lets, lists of personal names, magical formulae and religious incantations,
collections of wisdom sayings or proverbs, compendia of technical termi-
nology pertaining to various trades and professional specialties, maps,
model business contracts, extracts from literary works-in short, a fair
representation of all the diverse subjects taught in school.
While the archaeological record preserves considerable data concern-
ing tablet-house curricula, it fails to clarify as a general rule whether the
school was an adjunct to the palace, ancillary to the temple, or was con-
ducted primarily under private auspices. At Larsa (modern Sankara), for
example, numerous school tablets found within the precincts of the royal
house of King Nuradad (1865-1850 B.C.) suggested a palace institution.
Likewise at Uruk (Warka), tablet concentrations fell within the remains
of the royal palace of Sinkasid. On the other hand, at Saduppuim (Tell
Abu Harmal), lexical and literary texts were all recovered from within the
temple of Nisaba and her spouse Haja, Sumerian patron-deities of the
scribal art. At Kish (Al Uhaimir), tablets revealing the former existence
of an edubba were excavated only upon the site of the scribes' domestic
quarters. Much the same pattern was repeated at Nippur (Nuffar) where
school texts were unearthed from scribal dwellings atop a hill on the far
side of a former canal running south of the Temple of Enlil. There dig-
Fall 1979 311
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)202.47.36.85 on Sun, 14 Nov 2021 14:23:30 UTC(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
gings produced an abundance of abandoned practice tablets, reference
works, and literary texts. Finally, at Ur (Mukayyar), excavators found a
house ("No. 1 Broad Street") belonging to a certain Igmil-Sin which con-
tained nearly 2,000 small lentil-shaped school texts, as well as a profusion
of religious works, literary compositions, and syllabaries. Given its lack of
immediate proximity to the temple or palace, the edubba of Igmil-Sin
may have been a purely private undertaking. (23)
Other major finds include school texts from Kisurra and Tell Ed-Der,
from Telloh, Adab, and a number of other locations. (24) Interestingly,
although it is known that many women in Old Babylonian times were lit-
erate and participated actively in community business life, (as shown, for
example, by signed contracts bearing women's names and by subscripts
on other commercial documents) the existence of female scribes is at-
tested to only by tablet fragments from Sippar. (25) No definite evidence
has ever been uncovered to indicate that girls attended schools of their
own or that co-educational instruction was offered in a tablet-house.
Nonetheless, the fact that women could read and write, a few even find-
ing employment as scribes, strongly suggests that provision of some sort
must have been made for the instruction of females. Presumably it would
have been possible for parents of middle and upper-class background to
find tutors for their children of either sex; and the custom may have been
unexceptional among royalty.
Archaeological discoveries at Mari supply the most conclusive data
concerning arrangements within the ancient Babylonian classroom. (26)
On the grounds of the great palace investigors uncovered two adjoin-
ing rooms of modest proportions which almost certainly served as places
of organized instruction. Occupying the middle of both enclosures were
ranges of low brick benches, of varying lengths, capable of accommodat-
ing one, two, or four occupants. Other benches of diminutive size ran
along the walls. No teacher's lectern or raised dias was found, but strewn
about the premises were scores of practice tables, some of which were
covered with minute script. Also, at Mari and elsewhere, archaeologists
have found in situ shallow water troughs which presumably held the wet
clay from which writing cakes or tablets could be kneaded. Oval pottery
trays with flat bottoms and rims associated with classrooms could have
served the same purpose, or perhaps were used to hold writing utensils.
III.
Model lessons and compositions recounting aspects of school life supply
a much more detailed if not always coherent indication of how the edub-
ba was staffed, the nature of the instruction offered, and the content of
the curriculum. Collectively, members of the tablet-house, young and
old, masters and pupils, referred to themselves as "school sons" (demu
edubba), but addressed one another privately as "colleagues" (gimeaas =
kinaitu). The headmaster or "school father" was the adda edubba, re-
312 HISTORY OF EDUCATION QUARTERLY
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)202.47.36.85 on Sun, 14 Nov 2021 14:23:30 UTC(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
spectfully termed "master" or ummia (Akkadian: ummianu). The ummia
figures prominently in school literature as a personnage of some impor-
tance. He is usually mentioned with a reverence becoming his exalted
status. "Master, god who (shapes?) humanity," runs one typical pan-
egyric, "my god you (verily) are. Like a puppy you have formed 'hu-
manity' (namlulu) in me." (27) Elsewhere a school graduate's eulogy of
his teacher is unsparing in its praise: "He guided my hand on the clay,
showed me how to behave properly, opened my mouth with words, ut-
tered good counsel, focused (my) eyes on the rules that guide the man of
achievement." (28) If a master deigned to visit a student's home, he was
accorded the seat of honor. (29) The school ummia was an "authority,"
one possessed of great wisdom and knowledge. More learned than lesser
men, the master was hailed as a dubsar gagazu ( = tupsarr mudui), a
"scribe rich in scholarship."
Assisting the tablet-house "father" was a sesgal or "elder brother." The
sesgal served apparently as a kind of tutor-assistant for the younger stu-
dents. His duties were to write down lines on a new clay tablet which the
"junior" scribe (dubsar tur) learned by rote and copied out below or on
the tablet's reverse side. The "standing lines" (mugubba) of the day's les-
son might be retained for later review; more often the practice tablet (im-
sar subba) was discarded at the end of the day after having been
"checked" (zgi karkar = baru) for accuracy by the "elder brother." Some-
times the student's portion was simply cut off and thrown away while the
tablet's top half was preserved for further use. The sesgal, besides review-
ing the boys' written exercises, was charged with hearing oral recitations
(kakeseke = telu; literally, "to make equal in the mouth"). Another staff
member mentioned frequently is the "over-seer" or "clerk" (ugula), possi-
bly an administrative functionary rather than a teacher. The ugula was
the "supervisor of the tablet-house" and was responsible for enforcing the
"statutes and rules" (gishura zagai = usurtu u tertu) of the school. The ti-
tle of ugula may have been synonymous with that of "proctor" (lu
gisshurra). Alternatively, the latter appelation may have designated a
separate supervisory role. Also cited in school literature are the dubsar
eme kiengira or "scribe of Sumerian" and the dubsar ni sid or
"mathematics teacher." The latter title appears to have been inter-
changeable with the dubsar zaga ("scribe of mensuration") and the dub-
sar asaga or "scribe of the field." There were in addition several other
kinds of lesser functionaries, including the teacher of drawing, the lu
usannake or "man of the whip" who served as disciplinarian, an atten-
dance monitor, and a gatekeeper.
Years of wearisome toil were demanded before a student could hope to
master the complexities of scribal craft (namdubsar = tupsarrutu).
Schooling began in early youth and continued into adulthood. The school
regimen made for a demanding preparatory period, one punctuated with
examinations and reviews. "I will write the second (exercise)," promises
Fall 1979 313
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)202.47.36.85 on Sun, 14 Nov 2021 14:23:30 UTC(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
one novice in an account preserved on a fragment with an Assyrian trans-
lation. (30) "Now," directs the examiner, "write your name in lapidary
form (i.e., as it would appear incised in stone)." The student prepares to
comply. "If you can, you will write (for yourself)," cautions the master.
His charge apparently succeeds, for the teacher pronounces the words,
"You are a scribe," and he proceeds, as it appears, to warn the boy not to
be overly impressed with his accomplishment. Elsewhere, a bilingual text
labeled "Examination Text A" dating to the period 1720-1625 B.C. re-
veals how testing was conducted in the tablet-house. The source is espe-
cially revealing for its wealth of detail on the specifics of the Babylonian
curriculum. (31) The scene is the courtyard of the edubba where an un-
mia proposes to examine informally a young scribe before the assembly of
masters. The school-father queries the candidate: "From your childhood
to your adult age you have been reposing in the tablet-house. Do you
know the scribal art that you have learned?" The candidate responds con-
fidently, "What would I not know? Ask me, and I will give you the
answer." The school master is skeptical. He predicts (correctly as it turns
out) that the young man will not be able to answer all the questions.
There follows a barrage of difficult and intricate problems.
The scribe is required during the course of the interrogation to trans-
late back and forth between Akkadian and Sumerian. He is examined
over different types of calligraphy and occult script. There are questions
about the various classes of priests and other types of professions. Part of
the examination concerns the preparation of official documents and
seals. Other questions review catagories of songs and problems of choral
direction. At one point, the master asks the candidate to explicate techni-
cal details of the "tongues" (eme = lisanu) of the several classes of priestly
officials, of silversmiths, jewelers, shepherds, and master shippers. The
master poses mathematical problems relating to the allocation of rations
and the division of fields. Finally, there is a query about the use and tech-
niques employed in playing musical instruments. At this point the junior
scribe abandons his effort and accuses the examiner of not having taught
him sufficiently. The tablet-house father responds with a stern repri-
mand:
What have you done, what good came of your sitting here? You are already a ripe man
and close to being aged! Like an old ass you are not teachable any more. Like withered
grain you have passed the season. How long will you play around? But, it is still not too
late! If you study night and day and work all the time modestly and without arrogance, if
you listen to your colleagues and teachers, you still can become a scribe! Then you can
share the scribal craft which is good fortune for its owner, a good angel leading you, a
bright eye, possessed by you, and it is what the palace needs. (32)
A conflation of three variant sources with Examination Text A yields a
seventeen-line composition dubbed "In Praise Of The Scribal Art" which
extends the same theme. (33) "The scribal art is the mother of orators,
314 HISTORY OF EDUCATION QUARTERLY
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)202.47.36.85 on Sun, 14 Nov 2021 14:23:30 UTC(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
the father of masters," the narrator proclaims. "The scribal art is delight-
ful, it never satiates you." Apparently addressing himself to the student,
the speaker continues, "The scribal art is not (easily) learned, (but) he
who has learned it need no longer be anxious about it." The tablet-house
father offers counsel: "Strive to (master) the scribal art and it will enrich
you. Be industrious in the scribal art and it will provide you with wealth
and abundance. Do not be careless concerning the scribal art, do not ne-
glect it." The passage following elaborates: "The scribal art is a 'house of
richness,' the secret of Amanki. Work ceaselessly with the scribal art and
it will reveal its secret to you . . . The scribal art is a good lot, richness
and abundance." The narrator emphasizes the difficulties of learning to
become a full-fledged scribe. "If you neglect it (the scribal art)," he warns
the student, "they will make malicious remarks about you. Since you were
a child it causes you grief . . . (but) work hard for it (and it will bring you)
its beautiful prosperity." Reference is made to the many tasks a scribe
performs, including the settling of accounts, surveying fields, using tech-
nical language, and writing in Sumerian. Even when he has attained to
the status of a master scribe, the speaker concludes, a conscientious dub-
sar will always be willing to work hard (literally, "call for the corvee bas-
ket") in the service of his craft. So didactic a composition would have
been considered well-adapted for classroom instruction; and it requires
no stretch of the imagination to surmise that it was authored expressly for
some such purpose.
School instruction began at an early age with young neophytes set to
memorizing and recording elementary syllabic exercises in a vowell se-
quence "u-a-i," such as tu-ta-ti, nu-na-ni, bu-ba-bi, zu-za-zi, and so on.
(34) This was followed by the study of a sign list of some 900 entries
which gave single signs along with their phonetic pronunciation. Then
came lexical lists containing hundreds, ultimately thousands of words and
phrases grouped according to meaning or subject matter. (35) Students
labored at great length over long lists or animals, plants, birds, fishes, in-
sects, stones and minerals, geographical and place-names; after which
there came short sentences to be copied out, the common formulae of
canonical texts, honorific titles, collections of the most common expres-
sions used in legal and administrative documents, and other compendia.
For example, one student records, "I have written (a tablet) from the dif-
ferent names of Inanna up to (the names of) the animals living in the
steppe (and the names of) the different artisans." (36) Compounding the
difficulty of learning any form of cuneiform script was the added disad-
vantage of having to do so in two dissimilar languages: in Sumerian,
which was best suited for classifying and recording; and the more plastic
Akkadian, better adapted to literary expression. Sumerian instruction re-
quired memorizing some 30,000 lines of lexical text. Akkadian likewise
produced uncounted lines of omnia which had to be committed to mem-
memory. Thus, school vocabularies at advanced levels were invariably
Fall 1979 315
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)202.47.36.85 on Sun, 14 Nov 2021 14:23:30 UTC(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
bilingual and divided into sections consisting of groups of Sumerian
words together with their Babylonian translations. (37) For example, the
Sumerian nin-da for "bull" would be paired with its Akkadian equivalent
mi-i-rum, while il-ar and ti-il-pa-nu would be juxtaposed with their signs
for "throwing stick." (38)
Some uncertainty surrounds how and when the two languages were
taught in school. Possibly teaching was conducted at the outset in the
Babylonian vernacular, and only later progressed with the study of Su-
merian, which by Old Babylonian times was no longer commonly spoken.
Or possibly bilingualism was pursued throughout in the edubba. What is
clear is that Sumerian was highly valued as the language of ancient litera-
ture, and its teaching definitely aimed at proficiency in speaking and
writing the language. "A scribe who does not know Sumerian," one saying
asks rhetorically, "where will he expect to obtain a translation of a Sumer-
ian text?" (39) Or, again, "If there is a translation to be made from the
Sumerian, the Sumerian is hidden from you!" (40) Scribes who had stud-
ied only the Akkadian language were thought to be deficient in their
training: "A scribe who does not know Sumerian, what (kind of) a scribe
is he?" (41) The implication, of course, is that Sumerian was no longer
the native tongue of scribes, and maybe was no longer a living language
at the time the passages were composed. (42) In the composition labeled
"Disputation Between Enkimansi and Girnishag," appears the line, "He is
a deaf fool when it comes to the scribal art, a silent idiot when it comes to
Sumerian." (43) Another gibe at a scribe allegedly ill-versed in Sumerian
runs, "Your tongue is not adapted to the Sumerian language." The so-
called "Colloquy Between Enkitalu and Enkihegal" contains a similar
line: "He is 'heavy' for the Sumerian language, he cannot move his tongue
correctly." (44) Following a succession of abusive criticisms, the scribe
Enkitalu emphasizes his diatribe with the words, "(And) that I will tell
you in both languages, Enkihegal!" (45)
Apparently the edubba course of instruction was as far-ranging and
comprehensive as it was difficult. Scattered references throughout the
school literature make mention of a broad array of subjects. Tablet-house
students naturally had to be proficient in keeping records and at letter-
writing. In the vituperative exchange between Enkimansi and Girnishag,
for example, one disputant hurls a charge at his fellow scribe: "You have
written a tablet, but you cannot penetrate (its) meaning; you have written
a letter (but) that is all you can do." (46) Stele-writing as a related
occupation of scribes was undoubtedly taught in school. (47) Surveying
also took its place in the curriculum, as shown in the taunt, "You go to
divide an estate but you are unable to divide it. For when you go to survey
the field, you are unable to hold the tape and the measuring rod; the pegs
of the field you cannot drive in; you are not able to figure out the sense."
(48) Regarding mathematics, one of the specific questions levied in Ex-
amination Test A, cited earlier, concerns multiplication, reciprocals, co-
316 HISTORY OF EDUCATION QUARTERLY
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)202.47.36.85 on Sun, 14 Nov 2021 14:23:30 UTC(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
efficients, the balancing of accounts, administrative accounting, and
computing pay allotments. (49) As Enkitalu and Enkihegal dispute their
respective virtues, mention is made (lines 6 and 57-78) of reciting the
multiplication table, inverted numbers, and the calculation of volume.
Still another important subject pursued was music. (50) The candidate
whose interrogation is recorded in Examination Text A is asked, "Do you
know . . . the summu-instrument, the timbutu, the harharu, and the
mnu-instrument, as many as they are?" The interrogator goes on to inquire
whether he is able to divide up and distinguish the various parts of a mu-
sical composition (pirsisunu parasu). (51) Once again, in the exchange
between Enkitalu and Enkihegal the allegation is made that one of the
two protagonists is unskilled in music. "Even if he had a zami-instru-
ment," the speaker claims, "he could not learn the art of singing, he, the
most backward among (his) classmates; he has not been able to make a
beautiful tremolo and sound . . . he cannot sing a song, cannot open his
mouth." (52)
Tablet-house students devoted much time to the study of legal phraseo-
logy. Though scribes did not function as the equivalent of attorneys or ar-
gue court cases, they were expected to be intimately conversant with legal
codes and their terminology. Numerous anthologies of law and the par-
ticulars of jurisprudence (ana ittisu) were drawn up in the edubba and
studied, both in Sumerian and with Akkadian translation. Besides the
well-known Codex of Lipit-Ishtar (c. 1920 B.C.) and the Code of Ur-
Nammu (c. 2100 B.C.), the famed "Verdicts Of The Just Order" (danat
masarim) or Code of Hammurabi (c. 1750 B.C.) was invariably studied in
school. A famous murder trial in Isin also seems to have found frequent
use as an exercise-piece copied out in the Old Babylonian edubba. (53)
Copies of model contracts, and of the Laws of Esnunna may have been
products of a tablet-house, recopied for instruction in the school at
Saduppum (Tell Abu Harmal). (54) A scribe who specialized in legal
studies, or was exceptionally well-trained in law, would find employment
as a recorder in a court of law. He was referred to as a dumu edubba (Ak-
kadian: sa dajjani) or "scribe of the judge."
As the student progressed from simple lexical and grammatical texts to
more connected examples of prose and poetry, the study of literature as-
sumed a more important role in his program of studies. Oral dictation of
literary passages may have been a relatively late introduction to the tab-
let-house; and the practice of exact replication may have been unusual in
pre-Old Babylonian times. Thereafter, the distinction becomes common
between "to dictate" (linguinna - quabui) and linginna - sataru, "to take
dictation." (55) The teacher would dictate a text; the student would re-
peat it orally and simultaneously record it on a tablet. One whose written
copy was faithful to the dictated word was thought to be an ideal scribe:
"A scribe whose hand moves in accordance with the mouth," runs one old
proverb, "he is indeed a scribe." (56) Another saying went as follows: "A
Fall 1979 317
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)202.47.36.85 on Sun, 14 Nov 2021 14:23:30 UTC(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
scribe without a hand (is like) a singer without a throat" -that is, an in-
jury to the hand of a scribe has the same incapacitating effect as an injury
to a singer's throat. (57) When Enkimensi and Girnishag argue over who
is the more competent dubsar, the first attacks his rival, saying, "Your
hand may be fair, but it is not fit for the reed stylus, is not apt for the clay
(tablet), (and your) hand does not rival (your) mouth." (58) Whatever
the form of instruction, whether primarily oral or written or a combina-
tion thereof, it appears reasonable to assume that the edubba master and
his assistants supplemented the bare lists, tables, and literary passages
copied down with oral explanatory material. It is known, for example,
that besides the canonical texts, there existed an extensive oral tradition
(sa pi ummani) involving narrative poems, hymns, lamentations, "wis-
dom" literature (proverbs and fables), and tales of the exploits of Sumer-
ian heroes which had been handed down from earliest times. Much of the
corpus of this material was preserved without benefit of reduction to writ-
ing until Old Babylonian times. Some works were not recorded until
much later, around the time of Ashurnasirpal in the mid-ninth century.
Fixing the place of literature in the tablet-house is a hazardous under-
taking, if only because so much disagreement attends discussion of pre-
cisely how the ancient Sumerian literary traditions were perpetuated and
their contents preserved. (59) Suffice it to say, it was in the schools of the
Old Babylonian period where the bulk of pre-Babylonian literature
deemed worthy of preservation was given fixed form. (60) This Neo-Su-
merian inheritance was incorporated into the Babylonian curriculum in
one of two ways. Either an oral tradition was "modernized" so as to make
it more congenial to the new Nippur theology, or an already extant writ-
ten body of literature was reworked in process of its rendering into Ak-
kadian. As noted previously, formerly Akkadian had been considered fit
primarily for administrative texts, for royal monuments (mainly transla-
tions or imitations of Sumerian prototypes), and for a handful of liter-
ary fragments. Now a whole new literary dialect was created for Akkad-
ian, and the works produced by it were gradually freed from excessive de-
pendence on Sumerian models. (61)
This phenomenon is nicely illustrated in the development of royal hym-
nology and prayers. Repeatedly, specific petitions or celebrations of par-
ticular historic occasions were divested of any features distinctive to a par-
ticular time or place. History, it could be said, was converted into myth,
and historical interests subordinated to theological considerations. (62)
Much the same process may have surrounded the canonization of other
literary forms in the schools, most notably epic poems. The results, no
matter what the specific means utilized, was a rich legacy of hymns,
epics, laments, love songs, lullabies, prayers, elegies, records of royal cor-
respondence, and legal compendia. This literature was to occupy a prom-
inent place in the curriculum of the Old Babylonian edubba for centuries
afterward.
318 HISTORY OF EDUCATION QUARTERLY
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)202.47.36.85 on Sun, 14 Nov 2021 14:23:30 UTC(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
IV.
The most distinctive if somewhat perplexing literary form studied in the
tablet-house was that of "hostilities (Akkadian: tesitu). (63) The Sumer-
ian term for this genre, freely translated, could be "man-against-man" or
"contest in speech." Typically a tesitu essay assumes the form of a verbal
contest of merit between two characters. Protagonists alternate with
speeches proclaiming their respective virtues, all the while hurling insults
at one another. An exchange is apt to become abusive in the extreme.
The argument between Enkitalu and Enkihegal, alluded to earlier, sup-
plies one illustration; the vitriolic debate between Enkimansi and Girni-
shag furnishes another. Examination Text A falls under the same general
heading since the tablet-house father's lengthy reprimand to the junior
scribe disparages the latter's qualifications as a student. Invariably, the
setting for "contest-in-speech" literature is the school, or involves char-
acters who are tablet-house graduates. This common feature has led some
to conclude that tesitu compositions were an invention of Sumerian
school scribes and were copied down and read by students. Sumero-
Babylonian Streitgedicht (as it has been dubbed aptly) has a certain air of
burlesque about it. Speaking of the stock characters and situations por-
trayed in school sketches, C.J. Gadd comments:
The absurdly complacent professor, the obsequious students, the bullying of students
who, in turn, ape but too faithfully the conceit of their superiors, the hoodwinking of
parents, the venality of teachers, the indiscipline and rowdyism of the schoolrooms-all
these might be the creations of a satirist, even a reformer, rather than the writings of men
themselves engaged in the activities so invidiously described, even caricatured. (64)
After pondering the question at some length, however, and considering
the possibilities that school literature was intended to serve as social criti-
cism or satire, Gadd concludes "that it was pure interest in contemporary
life (naturally, with a bias to their own profession) which inspired the
writers of these scenes." (65) Perhaps the abusiveness displayed - so ob-
viously blown up to larger than life proportions -was calculated to amuse
and entertain, to afford relief from the drudgery of ordinary classroom
routine. Whatever the truth of the matter, the authors of school tesitu
had a keen sense for the ludicrous and a warm appreciation of the human
comedy.
The essay "Schooldays" has rightly been described as one of the most
"human" documents excavated in the ancient Near East. (66) This brief
piece, probably penned by some anonymous ummia around 2000 B.C.,
offers a vivid account of school life in Old Babylonian times. Meticulously
assembled and restored from over twenty different tablet fragments, the
document describes in graphic detail the experiences and reactions of a
schoolboy attending the edubba. (67) It opens with a question from a
tablet-house father to a former student. "School-son," he asks, "where
did you go (when you were young)?" The graduate recalls, "I went to
Fall 1979 319
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)202.47.36.85 on Sun, 14 Nov 2021 14:23:30 UTC(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
school." The master then asks, "What did you do in school?" The ques-
tion prompts a long reminiscence on the school-son's part of what pur-
ports to be a day in his life as a student. He tells how he recited his tablet,
ate his lunch, prepared a new tablet, wrote it, finished it; then his model
tablets were brought to him. In the afternoon he returned to his writing
exercises. When school was dismissed, the boy went home. "I ... entered
the house," the speaker relates, "and found my father sitting there. I ex-
plained my exercise-tablets to my father, recited my tablet to him, and he
was delighted...." Afterwards, the boy summoned servants to bring
food and drink, to bathe his feet, and to prepare his bed. "Wake me early
in the morning," he instructs them, "I must not be late (to school) lest my
teacher cane me."
The next day, so the narrative continues, "When I rose early in the
morning, I faced my mother and said to her, 'Give me my lunch, I want
to go to school!' My mother gave me two rolls, and I set out; my mother
gave me two rolls, and I went to school. Upon arriving at the tablet-house
(the monitor) said to me, 'Why are you late?' I was afraid, my heart was
pounding," Trembling with apprehension, the tardy student hastened in-
side and managed a respectful curtsy before the teacher. But to no avail;
the boy was to have a hard time of it. Upon examining his work and find-
ing it incomplete, the ummia caned the student. Matters quickly went
from bad to worse. An edubba proctor reprimanded him for his slovenly
appearance and for loitering in the streets. He was caned again. As the
narrator remembers it, the remainder of the day was given over mainly to
beatings from other school functionaries. When he spoke without permis-
sion, he was punished. The next caning was administered for standing at
ease without asking permission. The boy forgot to ask permission to rise
from his seat and received another beating. When he wandered out the
gate without the gatekeeper's authorization, he was beaten once again.
His Sumerian language teacher flogged him for not speaking properly in
Sumerian. Yet another whipping came at the hand of the school disci-
plinarian. The ummia pronounced the student's handwriting unsatisfac-
tory and called for still another session with the cane.
The hapless boy began to dread school and neglected his lessons. As for
his teacher, the speaker recalls, he "took no delight in me; even stopped
teaching me his skill in the scribal art; in no way prepared me in the mat-
ters essential to the art of being a 'young scribe,' or the art of being an
'elder brother' (sesgal). In growing despair, the student went to his father
with a proposal that the school master be invited home and plied with
gifts.
At this point, the narrator himself takes over and assumes the role of a
third-person observer of events ensuing. "To that which the schoolboy
said, his father gave heed. The teacher was brought from school; having
entered the house, he was seated in the 'great chair' (i.e., the place of
honor). The schoolboy attended and served him, and whatever he
320 HISTORY OF EDUCATION QUARTERLY
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)202.47.36.85 on Sun, 14 Nov 2021 14:23:30 UTC(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
learned of the scribal art, he unfolded to his father. His father, with
joyful heart, spoke to the headmaster of the school: 'You have opened the
hand of my young son, and you make him an expert. You show him all
the fine points of the scribal art; you have shown him the recondite details
of mathematical problems . . . and cuneiform script." Thereupon, the
father turned to his household servants and instructed them to bathe his
honored guest with fragrant irda-oil. The schoolmaster was dressed in a
fine new garment, given money and a ring for his finger.
Mollified, the pedagogue grew more kindly disposed toward his host's
son and "with joyful heart" addressed him, saying, "Young man, because
you did not neglect my word, did not forsake it; may you reach the pinna-
cle of the scribal art, achieve it completely from beginning to end. Be-
cause you shared with me unstintingly, and paid me a salary larger than
my efforts deserve and have shown me great honor, may Nisaba, the
queen of guardian dieties, be your guardian angel." There follows a
lengthy invocation in which the ummia calls down blessings upon the stu-
dent: "Of your brothers may you be their leader, of your friends, may you
be their chief, may you rank the highest of the schoolboys. . . . You have
carried out well the school's activity, you have become a man of learning.
Nisaba, the queen of the place of learning, you have exalted. O Nisaba,
praise!" The self-depreciatory humor apparent in this account of the
schoolmaster's final change of heart, from hostility and anger to lavish
praise, is almost too obvious to bear mention.
Another revealing school essay is entitled, "A Scribe And His Perverse
Son," a work of some 180 lines reconstructed from more than a score of
tablet fragments. (68) It begins with a dialogue between a father who is
apparently a professional scribe and his son. (69) "Where did you go?"
asks the father. "I did not go anywhere," his son replies sullenly. "If you
did not go anywhere," exclaimes the father, "why do you idle about? Go
to school, stand before your 'school-father,' recite your assignment, open
your schoolbag, write your tablet, let your 'elder brother' write your new
tablet for you. When you have completed your assignment and reported
to your monitor, return home to me, and do not wander about in the
street." To make sure the boy has understood his instructions, the father
in growing exasperation has his son repeat them verbatim. The boy com-
plies, and when he finishes, his father adds, "Come now, be a man. Do
not loiter about in the public square or wander along the boulevard. As
you walk through the streets, do not gawk at everything around you. Be
humble and show humility before your school monitor. When you make a
show of modesty, the monitor will like you."
The remainder of the essay consists of long monologue on the father's
part. Turning bitter as he speaks, the father rebukes his wayward son for
his constant grumblings and repeated disobedience. The boy is reminded
that unlike so many other adolescents his age, he was never made to work
in the fields: "I never sent you to work (carrying reed rushes) or to plow
Fall 1979 321
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)202.47.36.85 on Sun, 14 Nov 2021 14:23:30 UTC(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
my field. I never sent you to work to dig up my field. I never sent you to
work as a laborer." Other boys, the father points out, are made to help
support their parents, even very young children. "Night and day," the
father complains, "am I tortured because of you. Night and day you
waste in pleasure. You have grown wealthy and influential; you are full-
grown and filled with your own sense of self-importance." The boy is
warned that his family expects his downfall; his kin will rejoice because
the boy has neglected cultivating his own "humanity." The scribe mourns
that his offspring has shown little inclination to follow in his father's foot-
steps and become a scribe. Warming to his theme, the father continues
with words of praise for the scribal art. He urges his son anew to take up
the craft. The essay concludes with his invocation of a blessing from the
moon-god Nanna and his consort Ningal.
More acrimonious by far in its tone is the exchange cited previously
where Enkimansi, an older student, contends with his rival, Girnishag.
The latter is represented as having attained the superior status of a sesgal
or "elder brother" in the edubba. The dialogue opens with Girnishag ask-
ing Enkimansi, "Son of the tablet-house, today (after completing the
tablet) what shall we write?" The subordinate student responds by pro-
posing that the day's usual grammar lesson and the study of dialects be
abandoned. Instead, declares Enkimansi somewhat impudently, "I am
resolved to write something of my own. I myself will decide the subject."
Shocked by this display of youthful independence, the sesgal asks, "If you
are to decide the subject-matter for yourself (how can I be) your 'elder
brother?' In what, pray tell, does my 'big brotherhood' consist? Girnishag
turns sarcastic: "O intellect of weighty mind, vindicator (?) of the tablet-
house, luminary of writing, lion (?) of Sumerian, your hand does not rival
(your) mouth. You cannot equal me, for I am a scribe. ... (If I were)
like you, I could not be called a scribe." (70)
Enraged, Enkimansi retorts, "What do you mean, I am not a scribe like
you? When you write a document, it makes no sense. When you write a
letter it is illegible. You go to divide an estate, but you are unable to di-
vide it. For when you go to survey a field, you are unable to hold the tape
and the measuring rod; the pegs of the field you cannot drive in; you are
not able to figure out the sense." He adds, "You don't know how to arbi-
trate between the contesting parties. You aggravate struggle among
brothers. You are the most unworthy among all scribes. What are you fit
for, can anyone say?" Girnishag responds in kind. He re-affirms his own
competence, protesting that he is indeed an able surveyor, an experi-
enced arbitrator between contesting parties, skilled in pacifying
arguments. Returning to the attack, he taunts the junior scribe, saying,
"But in everything you (are incompetent), the most careless person im-
aginable. When you do multiplication, your work is full of errors. . ."
The torrent of abuse goes on. Epithets are exchanged in quick succession.
Girnishag alleges that Enkimansi cannot compose a ritual prayer, is
322 HISTORY OF EDUCATION QUARTERLY
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)202.47.36.85 on Sun, 14 Nov 2021 14:23:30 UTC(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
unable to transfer an inscription from a tablet to a stele, or impart the
secrets of a ceremony. The former further derides Enkimansi's preten-
sions at being a scribe. The latter rises to the challenge with hyperbolic
criticisms of his own. "What do you mean," he demands finally, "I am
not the 'heart' of the student body?"
At a later point, one of the two characters-it is difficult to ascertain
which-claims superiority by virtue of his lineage. "Gifted with a
Sumerian name, I have written (Sumerian) since childhood. But you are
a bungler, a braggart. You cannot shape a tablet properly, you cannot
even handle the clay. You cannot write your own name! Your hand is un-
fit for tablet-writing. . . . Clever fool (galam huru), cover up your ears!
You cannot hope to emulate me, I am a Sumerian." (71) By this time,
the quarrel has become so heated that the intervention of the ugula or
"supervisor" of the tablet-house is required. Angered by Enkimansi's in-
temperance, the monitor threatens to lock up the obstreperous student in
chains:
Why is it you behave this way? One knocks down the other, 'grinding the grain, threshing
the straw' (a metaphor suggestive of a remorseless assault), and brawls in the tablet-house.
The commotion assails my ears! What do you think you 'elder brother' is for? Do you sup-
pose you are more learned than he? Why do you fail to show him the respect to which he is
entitled? And yet you continue 'grinding the grain, threshing the straw.' The master (um-
mia) who knows all, even he advises me to do whatever is necessary (to restore peace). For
one such as you, assailing your 'elder brother,' there is only a stick awaiting you. I will beat
you with it, wrap a . . . chain around your feet, and keep you confined within the tablet-
house for a full two months and not let you out! (72)
Following four unintelligible lines, the composition closes with the terse
comment, "In the dispute between Girnishag and Enkimansi the ummia
gave the verdict."
Overall, the impression given is one of brawling students and harried
teachers trying vainly to preserve order in the classroom. Judging from
the "Schooldays" essay as well as this debate, discipline must have been
harsh and unforgiving. Students are portrayed as indolent or disruptive.
Respect for teachers is conspicuously lacking. In contrast, the first por-
tion of yet another school essay starts off in a much happier vein. An
edubba graduate is summoned to hear a story told by a ugula or a clerk of
an estate. The clerk recounts how when he was a boy in school, his
teacher in turn had reminisced about his own days as a student. "I like
you, was once a little fellow and had an 'elder brother,' " the ummia had
said to the future clerk. "The ummia would assign me work (that was
even too much) for a (grown) man." But as the clerk's schoolmaster re-
members it, when he was in school he was a diligent and conscientious
pupil. He paid attention to his 'elder brother' and showed proper defer-
ence before him. The sesgal, for his part, displayed humility and was not
caught up with a sense of his own self-importance.
Fall 1979 323
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)202.47.36.85 on Sun, 14 Nov 2021 14:23:30 UTC(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
Impatiently, the edubba graduate breaks in on the clerk's tendentious
account. Much of the rest of the essay follows the now-familiar pattern of
vituperative complaints and accusations levied by one character at an-
other. The scribe heaps abuse on the clerk for implying with his story that
he - the tablet-house graduate - has been negligent somehow in the per-
formance of his duties. "Why do you lay down rules for me as if I were an
idler?" he asks angrily. "Anyone who heard you would drop his hands in
despair." The young scribe protests that he understands his responsibili-
ties and has been faithful in discharging all the obligations of his position.
He has labored conscientiously. He has superintended the household
slaves and kept them at their tasks. The scribe, or so he alleges, has of-
fered repeated prayers to guardian duties as the ugula instructed. He has
fulfilled the clerk's order to keep the estate's field laborers working night
and day.
The ugula responds amiably enough, conceding the truth of his ac-
cuser's words. He admits, or so it appears, that the scribe has excelled in
all aspects of his work. The clerk notes that his subordinate as acquired a
good reputation as a supervisor in his own right; he is well thought of by
all. The scribe's commands are obeyed, he has kept peace among staff
members, and the scribe's former teachers are pleased with his work since
leaving the tablet-house. The composition concludes with the ugula's
repetition of a lengthy blessing delivered by schoolmasters. He calls upon
Nisaba, patron goddess of the edubba, to look with favor upon the
school-house graduate, to grant him joyfulness of heart, good fortune in
his future endeavors, and continued effectiveness in his work of settling
disputes. "May the loftiness of Nisaba," says the clerk, "bring you unri-
valed rejoicing." (73)
Other vignettes of school routine and the life of a scribe are less well-
preserved. Of those cited, the "Schooldays" essay and the composition en-
titled "A Scribe And His Perverse Son" are the most complete and best
understood. Portions of the Examination Texts still await explication and
further interpretation, as do parts of the "Disputation Between Enki-
mansi and Girnishag" and the piece sometimes called "Colloquy Between
Enkitalu and Enkihegal." Still more fragmentary in character are various
proverbs or sayings found on tablets which relate to Babylonian scribes.
Incomplete though they may be, they share with the longer specimens of
school literature the capacity to conjure up the spirit of schoolroom in-
struction from a very remote period. "You are a scribe and you don't even
know your own name! You should slap your face.' " So runs one taunt at a
scribal student who has just made an absurd and inexcusable mistake in
his work. "You may be a scribe when viewed from above." reads another,
"but you are not even a man when viewed from below"-that is, the
scribe possesses the confidence of his superiors, but he does not have the
respect of his subordinates and colleagues. In what is probably a refer-
ence to the pupil who was slow in learning to read syllabic exercises aloud,
324 HISTORY OF EDUCATION QUARTERLY
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)202.47.36.85 on Sun, 14 Nov 2021 14:23:30 UTC(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
one tablet fragment records the words, "A fellow who cannot even make
the sounds 'a-a,' where will he expect to obtain fluent speech?" Yet an-
other saying pokes fun at a young student more attentive to his hunger
than his lessons: "A junior scribe is over-much concerned with food for his
stomach; he does not pay attention to his scribeship." Finally, there is
preserved a laconic warning about the probably destiny of a scribe who,
through malfeasance, might be forced to take up a more lowly occupa-
tion as a writer of magical incantations: "A disgraced scribe becomes a
man of spells." (74)
V.
Babylonian schoolhouse literature considered as a whole affords a
wealth of information about early schooling in the Near East. Inevitably,
much data is missing. Still unanswered are questions concerning the so-
cial composition of scribes, prevailing patterns of socialization, and the is-
sues of contention that must have made for lively, animated debate
among the literati. Nonetheless a surprising amount of material has sur-
vived as a basis for reasoned conjecture. Details of the tablet-house curric-
ulum, how instruction was managed and classroom discipline main-
tained, the larger role of the school within the political economy, the
ideals of scribal craft-all can be gleaned from the lines of edubba com-
positions. More important, the figures of teacher and student are neither
dim nor shadowy. They appear clothed with substance, so to speak, and
their full humanity is preserved almost intact despite the lapse of almost
forty centuries. They are individual characters with defined personali-
ties: the despairing father and his delinquent son, an angry and impa-
tient school monitor, the long-winded clerk, an obsequious schoolmaster
all too willing to dispense praise for a price, a bully of a senior student
and a disrespectful junior scribe. These persona add a dimensional qual-
ity largely absent in accounts of school life in other distant historical peri-
ods. What is all the more surprising is the substantial antiquity of these
reports, and the sense for the familiar they engender for an otherwise re-
mote cultural milieu.
The Greek satirist Lucian, in a dialogue on the vanity of human hopes
and effort, written a full thousand years after the Babylonian tablet-
house had slipped into history, ventured a melancholy prediction,
"Nineveh," he wrote, "has already perished, and not a trace of it now re-
mains. As for Babylon, the city of the magnificent towers and the great
circuit-wall, soon it too will be like Nineveh, and men will look for it in
vain." The Hebrew prophet Jeremiah advanced a similar prophecy con-
cerning the ancient land of Mesopotamia: "Her cities are a desolation, a
dry land, and a wilderness, a land wherein no man dwells, neither does
any son of man pass thereby." For almost another two millennia the pro-
phets' declarations held true, until the remains of once-mighty civiliza-
tion were once again brought to light. Only in modern times has appre-
Fall 1979 325
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)202.47.36.85 on Sun, 14 Nov 2021 14:23:30 UTC(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
ciation grown for the extent of mankind's indebtedness to that ancient
culture. Revealed by the documents is an image of Mesopotamia as an
important and great civilization early in the history of the human race.
Although difficult to fathom and to appreciate across the span of so many
centuries, complex and alien in its functioning, and somewhat inaccessi-
ble by virtue of the difficulties presented by its long-dead languages,
Mesopotamia nonetheless emerges as a civilization aware of its own im-
age, as focused and purposeful in its aspirations, and as consistent in all
the facets of its self-expression as any of the later great civilizations. (75)
The historical account of how that culture was shaped, defined, and pre-
served in the humble Babylonian tablet-house forms an integral part of
the picture, and at one suggests something of the timeless character of in-
stitutionalized educational effort.
NOTES
The author wishes to express appreciation to Ms. Jane W. Heimerdinger, Research As-
sociate in the Tablet Collection of the University Museum, University of Pennsylvania; to
Professor Samuel Noah Kramer, formerly Curator of the Tablet Collection; to the re-
search staff of the Oriental Institute, University of Chicago; and to Mr. Sameer Khayri Al-
Ni'ma, formerly head of the A-Nidhal Secondary School, Baghdad, for technical assis-
tance with source materials utlized in the preparation of this manuscript; and to Robert
Rowland, Jr. who kindly consented to review an earlier draft of the paper.
1. A. Leo Oppenheim, "A Note On The Scribes In Mesopotamia," in Studies In Honor
Of Benno Landsberger On His Seventy-Fifth Birthday, April 21, 1965, Oriental In-
stitute, University of Chicago Assyriological Studies No. 16, edited by Hans G. Giiter-
bock and Thorkild Jacobsen (Chicago, 1965), p. 253.
2. The earliest reference of record to schooling in Egypt appears in the "Instruction of
Duauf (or Khety)," dating to the early portion of the second millennium: "Instruc-
tion . . . composed for his son . . . when he voyaged up to the Residence, in order to
put him in the School (or House) of Books, among the children of the magistrates.
." Cited inJohann A. Erman, The Literature of the Ancient Egyptians, translated
by A.M. Blackman (London, 1927), p. 68. For a discussion of "wisdom" or teaching
texts (sebayet) and the difficulty of dating schools earlier than the fourteenth cen-
tury, see John A. Wilson, "Scribal Concepts of Education," in City Invincible, A
Symposium on Urbanization and Cultural Development in the Ancient Near East,
edited by Carl H. Kraeling and Robert M. Adams (Chicago, 1960), pp. 102-104; and
Jacquetta Hawkes, The First Great Civilizations (New York, 1973), pp. 435-436. Still
less can be said authoritatively about schooling in ancient India. Note the dated but
still useful discussions in Stuart Piggott, Prehistoric India (London, 1962), chapter V
and VI; Ernst J. Mackay, Early Indus Civilization, 2nd edition (London, 1948), pp.
123-128; R.E.M. Wheeler, The Indus Civilization (Cambridge, 1953), passim.; and
the reference in Hawkes, op. cit., p. 279. For a more general analysis, see C.J. Gadd,
Teachers And Students In The Oldest Schools, An Inaugural Lecture (London,
1956), pp. 1-2. The claim that Sumerian-Akkadian schools enjoy chronological
priority is advanced by, among others, Samuel Noah Kramer in History Begins At
Sumer (Garden City, New York, 1959), chapter 1.
326 HISTORY OF EDUCATION QUARTERLY
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)202.47.36.85 on Sun, 14 Nov 2021 14:23:30 UTC(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
3. Consult Adam Falkenstein, Archaische Texte aus Uruk (Leipzig, 1942), passim. and
especially pp. 64ff.
4. The bulk of documents presently available which reveals the work of scribes in keep-
ing economic and political records dates mainly from the Ur III and Old Babylonian
periods (c. 2220 1600 B.C.). Refer to Oppenheim, Letters From Mesopotamia;
Henry Frederick Lutz, "Sumerian Temple Records Of The Late Ur Dynasty,"
Semitic Philology 9 (May 31, 1928): 117-268; Tom B. Jones and John W. Snyder,
Sumerian Economic Texts from the Third Ur Dynasty (Minneapolis, 1961); Tom B.
Jones, "Sumerian Administrative Documents: An Essay," in Sumerological Studies In
Honor Of ThorkildJacobsen, Oriental Institute, University of Chicago Assyriological
Studies No. 20, edited by StephenJ. Lieberman (Chicago, 1976), pp. 41-1; and Ed-
mund Sollberger, Business and Administrative Correspondence under the Kings of
Ur (Locust Valley, New York, 1966).
5. The following discussion of Scribal titles follows Benno Landsberger, "Scribal Con-
cepts of Education," in Kraeling and Adams, op. cit., pp. 94-95; and his "Baby-
lonian Scribal Craft and its Terminology," Proceedings of the Twenty-Third Inter-
national Congress of Orientalists (London, 1954), pp. 123-127.
6. For an illuminating discussion of the notion of a "strategic elite" and its contrast with
the concept of a "ruling class," consult Suzanne Keller, Beyond the Ruling Class.
Strategic Elites in Modern Society (New York: 1963), pp. 4-58. While her observa-
tions are intended to apply to modern societies, her analysis of elitist recruitment, in-
ternal organization, degree of specialization, and social standing can be adapted
readily to an archaic society with equal facility.
7. See E.F. Weidner, Politische Dokumente aus Kleinasien (Leipzig, 1923), p. 108; and
Oscar Schroeder, "Ein muiindlich zu bestellender altbabylonischer Brief," Orien-
talistische Literaturzeitung 21 (1918): 5ff.
8. See A. Leon Oppenheim, Ancient Mesopotamia (Chicago, 1964), pp. 157 ff.; and
Georges Roux, Ancient Iraq (London, 1964), chapter 11.
9. The case for the essential continuity of the Old Babylonian literary tradition with the
earlier Ur III period is made persuasively by Bendt Alster in "On The Earliest
Sumerian Literary Tradition, "Journal of Cuneiform Studies 28 (1976): 109-126. See
also F.R. Kraus, Wandel und Kontinuitbt in der sumerisch-babylonischen Kultur
(Leiden, 1954), pp. 24 ff.
10. This abbreviated analysis depends in part upon the interpretation and summation of-
fered in Oppenheim, Letters From Mesopotamia, p. 36.
11. References to the edubba were first collected by Adam Falkenstein, "Der 'Sohn des
Tafelhauses,' " Welt des Orients 1 (1948), pp. 174-175. Note also the citation of
variant renderings in Ake W. Sjoberg, "The Old Babylonian Eduba," in Lieberman,
op. cit., p. 159, note 1.
12. G.R. Castellino, "Two Sulgi Hymns," Studi Semitici 42 (1972): 30-31. The specific
citation is to Hymn B, lines 13-20, which refers to the education of Ishme-Dagan,
Viceroy of Ekallatum (c. 1781-1742 B.C.). The translation is modified following Sj8-
berg in Lieberman, op. cit., p. 176, note 60. Nisaba, goodness of science, "who in
her hand holds the stylus," was the patron deity of scribes and the art of writing. Con-
sult Oppenheim, Ancient Mesopotamia, p. 242.
13. Castellino, op. cit., p. 62. Refer to Falkenstein, op. cit., p. 185; and for a more ex-
tended discussion, see W.H.P. Romer, Sumerische "Kb'nzigshymnen" der Isin-Zeit
(Leiden, 1965), pp. 21-29; and William W. Hallo, "Toward A History Of Sumerian
Literature," in Lieberman, op. cit., p. 193, note 79.
Fall 1979 327
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)202.47.36.85 on Sun, 14 Nov 2021 14:23:30 UTC(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
14. This, at any rate, is the interpretation offered in M. Civil and R.D. Biggs, "Notes sur
des textes sumeriens archaiques," Revue d'Assyriologie et d'archeologie orientale 60
(1966): 1-16. The reasonable assumption is that the royal court ordered hymns to the
king from the edubba and that the teaching scribes composed hymns for the palace
while also using them for instructional purposes.
15. R. Frankena, "Altbabylonische Briefe in Umschrift and Ubersetzung," Briefe aus
dem British Museum, Vol. 2 (Leiden, 1966), p. 48, #81; and British Museum,
Cuneiform Texts from Babylonian Tablets in the British Museum 2 (London,
1896-), plate 11, lines 29-31.
16. Nederlandsch Archaeologisch Philologisch Instit voor het nabije ossten, Tabulae
Cuneaformae a F.M. Th de Liagre B'hl Collectae (Leiden, 1954), #84, lines 21-23.
See Also I.J. Gelb, et. al., The Assyrian Dictionary Vol. Z (Chicago and Gluckstadt,
1956-), p. 75; and University (of Pennsylvania) Museum, Babylonian Section,
Publication No. VII (1911-), #89.
17. Erich Ebeling, Keilschrifttexte aus Assur religib'sen Inhalts (Leipzig, 1919), p. 200,
#122, line 10.
18. Gerhard Meier, "Ein akkadisches Heilungsritual aus Bogazkoy," Zeitschrift fUir
Assyriologie und vorderasiatische Archaologie, 45 (1935): 200, line 4.
19. Consult the additional references cited in Sjoberg, op. cit., p. 160, note 4.
20. Benno Landsberger, "Scribal Concepts of Education," in Kraeling and Adams, op.
cit., p. 97. Landsberger's judgment is that the tablet-house disappeared after the Old
Babylonian II period (ends with Samsu-ditana, c. 1625-1595 B.C.) and that scribal
education, paralleling the change from a form of democracy to feudalism under the
Kassites, fell into the hands of individual families, a kind of nobility who traced their
ancestry back ten or twelve generations. For a discussion and analysis of the lineage of
prominent scribal families, consult W.G. Lambert, "Ancestors, Authors, and
Canonicity,"Journal of Cuneiform Studies 11 (1957): 1 ff.
21. The rendition follows Sjoberg, op. cit., p. 159; a variant translation is given in
Samuel Noah Kramer, The Sumerians, Their History, Culture, and Character
(Chicago, 1963), p. 236.
22. Illustrative reports include Donald E. McCown, "Writing and History: The New
Tablets from Nippur," The University (of Pennsylvania) Museum Bulletin 16 (July,
1951): 21-27; and Donald E. McCown, "Interim Report on the Excavations at Nip-
pur," Sumer 6 (1950: 90-100.
23. For a representative sample of archaeological reports and technical commentary, see
Adam Falkenstein, "Zu den Inschrifttenfunded der Grabung in Urak-Warka,
1960-61" Baghdad Mitteilungen 2 (1963): 41-42; Leonard Woolley, "Excavations at
Ur, 1930-1," AntiquariesJournal 11(1931): 365 ff.; and Woolley, Excavations at Ur,
A Record of Twelve Years' Work (London, 1954), pp. 185 ff.; C.J. Gadd, op. cit., p.
25; Sjoberg, op. cit., pp. 176-178; and D.E. McCown and R.C. Haines, Nippur I,
Chicago University, Oriental Institute Publication No. 78 (1967), pp. 148-49. For a
detailed description of temple schools, albeit for a later period, consult the references
in H. Lensen, "Mesopotamien Tempelanlagen," ZeitschrZftftr Assyriologie und ver-
wandte Gebiete 18 (1955): 1-36; and, most recently, preliminary press reports of
newly-uncovered school sites near Baghdad at Tell Abu Harmal (Saduppum) which
appeared in Baghdad's official newspaper Althawra for July 20, 1977.
24. See D.D. Luckenbill, Inscriptions from Adab, Chicago University, Oriental Institute
Publication No. 14 (1930), pp. 53-56; Civil and Biggs, op. cit., pp. 1-5; and for a
report on inscriptions presumed to be products of a tablet-house at Telloh, refer to F.
328 HISTORY OF EDUCATION QUARTERLY
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)202.47.36.85 on Sun, 14 Nov 2021 14:23:30 UTC(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
Thureau-Dangin, Nouvelles fouilles de Telloh (Paris, 1910-1914), passim. Inscrip-
tions from Kisurra and Tell Ed-Der appear in Iraq Museum, Texts in the Iraq
Museum 7 (Baghdad, n.d.), #236-253.
25. See R. Harris, "The Organization and Administration of the Cloister in Ancient
Babylonia," Journal of the Economic and Social History of the Orient 6 (1963):
138 139; and Benno Landsberger, Materialienzum sumerischen Lexikon 9 (Rome,
1937), p. 148. The subscript munus preceding dubsar ("scribe") following a tablet in-
scription shows the female gender of the writer, as in SU-MUNUS DUB.SAR on a
Sippar tablet. Refer to Berlin Staatliche Museen, Vorderasiatische Schrzftdenkmaler
der Kbnzgliche Museen 10 (Leipzig, 1907): #207. For another example, see British
Museum, Cunezform Texts from Babylonian Tablets in the British Museum 6 (Lon-
don, 1896), plate 35a. A third inscription is recorded in A. Leo Oppenheim,
Catalogue of the Cunezform Tablets of the Wilberforce Eames Babylonian Collec-
tion, American Oriental Series No. 32 (New Haven, 1948), p. 21-22.
26. Full reports appear in Andre Parrot, "Mission archeologique de Mari II: Le Palais,
Architecture," Bibliotheque archeologique et historique 68 (Paris, 1958), pp. 186-
191 (plates XLI-XLII); Parrot, "Les fouilles de Mari, deuxieme campaigne (Hiver,
1934 35)," Syria 17 (1936): 21 (plates 3, 4); and in "Les fouilles de Mari, troisieme
campaigne (Hiver 1935-36)," Syria 18 (1937): plate VIII. See also Adam Falkens-
tein's discussion in "Die babylonische Schule," Saeculum 4 (1953): 127; and the more
cautious identification in F.R. Kraus, "Briefschreib-ubungen im altbabylonischen
Schulunterricht," in Vooraziatisch-Egyptisch Genootschap "Ex Oriente Lux," 16
(Leiden, 1964), p. 33.
27. J.J.A. Van Dijk, La Sagesse sumeiro-accadienne (Leiden, 1953), p. 24. For further ex-
plication of the important concept of namlulu or "humanity," see Kramer, The
Sumerians, p. 243, 264, 285-286; and a commentary in Gadd, op. cit., p. 13, note 1.
28. Samuel Noah Kramer, Cradle of Civilization (New York, 1967), p. 124.
29. Samuel Noah Kramer, "Schooldays: A Composition Relating to the Education of a
Scribe,"Journal of the American Oriental Society 69 (1949): 203; 206, line 52.
30. Paul Haupt, "Arab, Tajr and Assyrian, Tamkaru," Bertrage zur Assyriologie 10
(Baltimore, 1913) p. 36; and Haupt, "Ishtar's Azure Necklace," ibid., p. 99. See also
Cuneiform Texts from Babylonian Tablets in the British Museum 2 (London,
1896- ), #K4815.
31. Text A comes from the library of Assurbanipal, at Nineveh, and is preserved in
Musee national du Louvre, Textes cuneiformes (Paris, 1910), #1696. The translation
and summary appears in Landsberger's "Scribal Concepts of Education," op. cit.,
pp. 99-101. See also Ake W. Sjoberg, "Examenstext A," Zeitschrzft fuir Assyriologie
und verwandte Gebiete 64 (1975): 137-176.
32. Landsberger, ibid., p. 101.
33. Ake W. Sjoberg, "In Praise Of The Scribal Art," Journal of Cunezform Studies 24
(1972): 126-129.
33. Ake W. Sjoberg, "In Praise Of The Scribal Art," Journal of Cuneiform Studies 24
(1972): 126-129.
34. See Benno Landsberger, "Zum 'Silbenalphabet B.'" Zwei altababylonische
Schulbiucher aus Nippur (Ankara, 1959) p. 98.
35. For example, the sign ilu as a heading signified that the entries to follow were names
of divinities; matu indicated that the next list designated various peoples; and the
sign for "wood" preceded "box" or the name of a type of tree, and so on. An il-
lustrative list containing the sixty names of a deity appears in Bruno Meissner, "Tex-
Fall 1979 329
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)202.47.36.85 on Sun, 14 Nov 2021 14:23:30 UTC(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
tkritische Bemerkungen zu einem medizinischen Kompendium," Archiv fu'r Keil-
schriJft-forschung 1 (1923): 12.
36. Joint Expedition of the British Museum and of the Museum of the University of Penn-
sylvania, Ur Excavations, Texts, 6/2 (London, 1928), #167, lines 16-17; and Benno
Landsberger, Materialien zum Sumerischen Lexikon 8 (Rome, 1937), #14; and the
same phrase from a longer dialogue in Samuel Noah Kramer, "Sumerian Literary
Texts from Nippur in the Museum of the Ancient Orient at Istanbul," Annual of the
American Schools of Oriental Research 23 (New Haven, 1944): #116, obverse, lines
3-4.
37. Lines 198-200 of the bilingual vocabulary Erimhus I, for example, read: dulla =
redutu ("succession"), eidulla = edullu ("a building"), lahlah = salalu ("to lead into
captivity," "to plunder"). See E. Leichty, "The Omen Series Summa Izbu," Texts
from Cunezform Sources (Locust Valley, New York, 1970), p. 232; Gelb, op. cit., vol.
E, p. 38b and vol. L, p. 173 b. Old Babylonian lexical and grammatical texts are
similarly divided into sections of etymologically unrelated words, each pair given in
Sumerian and a translation. See Benno Landsberger, Materialien zum sumerischen
Lexicon 2 (Rome, 1937), pp. 142-146; and Godrey Rolles Driver, Semitic Writing
from Pictograph to Alphabet (Oxford, 1976), pp. 65 ff.
38. A good discussion of sign lists is supplied in A. Leo Oppenheim, Ancient Mesopo-
tamia, pp. 244 ff. Since some passages (as distinct from single words) were quite
lengthy, it is doubtful whether they were memorized as was the case with the simpler
bilingual vocabulary lists.
39. Edmund J. Gordon, Sumerian Proverbs, Glimpses of Everyday Life In Ancient Meso-
potamia (New York, 1968), p. 208, #2.49.
40. Edward Chiera, Sumerian Epics and Myths, University of Chicago, Oriental Institute
Publication No. 15, Cuneiform Series III (Chicago, 1934), #67, obverse, lines 7-8.
41. Gordon, op. cit., p. 206, #2.47.
42. See J.S. Cooper, "Sumerian and Akkadian in Sumer and Akkad," Orientalia, new
series 42 (1973): 239-246. For the contrary interpretation, see Gadd, op. cit., p. 18;
and the discussion in Sjoberg, "The Old Babylonian Eduba," op. cit., pp. 161-162.
43. Ur Excavations, Texts 6/2, op. cit., #150, line 10.
44. Universitat Jena, Texte und Materalien der Frau Professor Hilprecht Collection of
Babylonian Antiquities im Eigentum der Universitat Jena, Neue Folge 3 (Leipzig,
1932), #42ii, line 13.
45. Ibid., line 6: and see also Samuel Noah Kramer, "Sumerian Literary Texts," op. cit.,
line 56 of the same dialogue. In the exchange between Enkimansi and Girnishag, the
one protagonist challenges his opponent with the question, "Do you, as I do, speak
Sumerian?" Loc. cit., line 66.
46. See M. Civil, "Notes on Sumeriar Lexicography I,"Journal of Cune2form Studies 20
(1966): 123.
47. Many examples of stele inscriptions survive. Note, for instance, the copy of a stele of
Isme-Dagan of Isin reproduced in E. Chiera, Sumerian Religious Texts (Upland, Pe-
nsylvania, 1924), #13. For other illustrations, consult J.J.A. VanDijk, "Textes divers
du Musee de Baghdad," Sumer 11 (1955): 110, plate XVI. and Ake W. Sjoberg, "Ein
Selbstpreis des Konigs Hammurbai von Babylon," Zeitschrift fur Assyriologie und
verwandte Gebeite 54 (1961): 51-70.
48. Ur Excavations, Texts 6/2, op. cit., #150. Note also the reference: "to write a stele, to
draw a field, to settle accounts," in Sjoberg, "In Praise of the Scribal Art," op. cit., p.
127, line 15.
330 HISTORY OF EDUCATION QUARTERLY
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)202.47.36.85 on Sun, 14 Nov 2021 14:23:30 UTC(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
49. See also line 48 with its reference to "counting and accounting," in Kramer, "School-
days," op. cit., p. 206.
50. See the discussion in Adam Falkenstein, "Die Babylonische Schule," Saeculum 4
(1955): 132, note 28; and in his "Der 'Son des Tafelhauses,'" op. cit., p. 185.
51. Sj8berg, "Examenstext A," op. cit., p. 142. Other references to the teaching of music
appear in Kramer, "Sumerian Literary Texts," op. cit., lines 94-97; and in Texte
und Materialien der Frau Professor Hilprecht Collection . . ., op. cit., #42, obverse
11, lines 10-15.
52. For commentary, consult J. Renger, "Untersuchungen zum Priestertum der altbaby-
lonischen Zeit," Zeitschrzft furi Assyriologie and verwandte Gebiete 59 (1969): 181.
53. See Thorkild Jacobsen, "An Ancient Mesopotamian Trial for Homicide," Studia
Biblica et Orientalia 12 (Rome, 1959): 130-150.
54. A. Goetze, The Laws of Eshnunna (New Haven, 1956), p. 14.
55. Landsberger, "Scribal Concepts of Education," op. cit., pp. 116-117.
56. Gordon, op. cit., p. 202, #2.40.
57. Ibid., p. 204, #2.43. Alternatively: "A scribe who writes illegibly or cannot take accu-
rate dictation is as useless as a mute (or untalented) singer."
58. Quoted in Sjoberg, "The Old Babylonian Eduba," op. cit., p. 170. Kramer, The
$umerians, p. 241, translates "cannot take dictation."
59. Note the technical analysis appearing in Adam Falkenstein, "Zur Chronologie der su-
merischen Literatur," Compte rendu de la seconde Rencontre assyriologique interna-
tionale (Paris, 1951), pp, 12-30; and the discussion in M. Civil, "Remarks on Sumer-
ian and Bilingual Texts,"Journal of Near Eastern Studi?s 26 (1967), pp. 201 ff.
60. See William W. Hallo, "Toward A History of Sumerian Literature," in Lieberman,
op. cit., pp. 181-203. Hallo's judgment is that many of the finest compositions from
the courts of Lagash, Ur, and elsewhere in Neo-Sumerian times (c. 2200-1900 B.C.)
derived wholly or in part from prototypical exemplars dating back to Old Sumerian
times (c. 2500-2200 B.C.), and were either revised or updated subsequently by
Babylonian scribes. See also his "On the Antiquity of Sumerian Literature, "Journal
of the American Oriental Society 83 (1963): 167-176.
61. See W. Von Soden, Zweisprachzgkeit in der geistig en Kulture Babylonians (Vienna,
1960); and D.O. Edzard, Heidelberger Studium zum alten Orient (Weisbaden,
1967), pp. 185-199.
62. An interesting account is given in William W. Hallo, "Individual Prayer in Sumer-
ian: The Continuity of a Tradition," Journal of the American Oriental Society 88
(1968): 71-89. Also useful for a broader perspective is Samuel Noah Kramer,
Sumerian Mythology (Philadelphia, 1972).
63. Gadd, op. cit., pp. 39-42. See also R.H. Phiffer, "Fables and Didactic Tales," in An-
cient Near Eastern Texts, edited by James B. Pritchard (Princeton, 1955), p. 411.
64. Ibid., p. 36.
65. Ibid., p. 38.
66. Kramer, "Schooldays," op. cit., p. 199; Kramer, The Sumerians, p. 237. See also
Kramer, History Begins At Sumer, chapter 2.
67. Sources are given in Kramer, "Schooldays," op. cit., pp. 200-201.
68. Quoted passages are free renditions from the German translation in Ake W. Sjoberg,
"Der Vater Und Sein Missratener Sohn," Journal of Cunejform Studies 25 (1973):
105-169.
69. A contrary interpretation holds that the character of the father in this essay claims to
be a "singer" (nar). For reasons too complex to treat succinctly, one scholar's settled
Fall 1979 331
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)202.47.36.85 on Sun, 14 Nov 2021 14:23:30 UTC(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
conclusion is that the entire composition should be viewed as a satire of the profession
of singers, composed by scribes. Consult Brendt Alster, "On the Sumerian Composi-
tion 'The Father and His Disobedient Son'," Revue d' Assyriologie et d' archeologie
orientale 69 (1975): 81-84.
70. See Gadd, op. cit., p. 31; and Sfo'berg, "The Old Babylonian Eduba," op. cit., p.
170.
71. The term galam huru or "clever fool" shares the literal sense of the Greek "sophos-
moros," or in English, "sophomore." Kramer, The Sumerians, p. 241; and Gadd, op.
cit., p. 34, note 1.
72. The narrative is freely adapted and selectively rendered after several published
sources, according to whatever seems to yield the clearest sense. Consult the variants
in Texte une Materialen der Frau Professor Hilprecht Collection . . ., op. cit., #42;
Kramer, The Sumerians, pp. 242-243; and in Gadd, op. cit., p. 35.
73. Kramer, The Sumerians, pp. 247-248.
74. Gordon, op. cit., pp. 200, 204, 207, 210, 211; respectively, #2.37, 2.44, 2.48, 2.53,
2.54.
75. Oppenheim, Letters From Mesopotamia, pp. 9-10.
332 HISTORY OF EDUCATION QUARTERLY
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)202.47.36.85 on Sun, 14 Nov 2021 14:23:30 UTC(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

# FIGURE

# BIBLIOGRAPHY

