# METADATA
Author: Michalowski P.
source_id:Michalowski2012_LiteracySc
title: Literacy, Schooling And The Transmission Of Knowledge In Early Mesopotamian Culture
Year: 2012
Source_ID:  Michalowski2012_LiteracySc
Source_Type: Article in Book: STUDIES IN SCHOOL EDUCATION IN THE ANCIENT NEAR EAST AND BEYOND, edited by W.S. VAN EGMOND and W.H. VAN SOLDT
Source_Role,Step_distance: 2 ,3,4 
Pages: 39-59
Web:
Published: NEDERLANDS INSTITUUT VOOR HET NABIJE OOSTEN, LEIDEN

# TEXT

THEORY AND PRACTICE OF
KNOWLEDGE TRANSFER
STUDIES IN SCHOOL EDUCATION IN
THE ANCIENT NEAR EAST AND BEYOND
PAPERS READ AT A SYMPOSIUM
IN LEIDEN, 17-19 DECEMBER 2008
edited by
W.S. VAN EGMOND and W.H. VAN SOLDT
NEDERLANDS INSTITUUT VOOR HET NABIJE OOSTEN
LEIDEN
2012

TABLE OF CONTENTS
W.S. van Egmond and Introduction 1
W.H. van Soldt
N. Veldhuis Domesticizing Babylonian Scribal Culture in Assyria: 11
Transformation by Preservation
M. Mostert Latin Learning and Learning Latin: Knowledge 25
Transfer and Literacy in the European Middle Ages
P. Michalowski Literacy Schooling and the Transmission of 39
Knowledge in Early Mesopotamian Culture
J. Jansen When Style Matters: Literacy in an 'Illegible' Place in 59
Rural Mali
W.S. van Egmond Informal Schooling and Textual Communities: 69
A Medievalist's Ruminations on Schooling in the
Ancient Near East
J.C. Fincke The School Curricula from Hattusa, Emar and Ugarit: 85
V
A Comparison
W.H. van Soldt Why Did They Write? On Empires and Vassals in 103
Syria and Palestine in the Late Bronze Age
Y. Cohen The Historical and Social Background of the Scribal 115
School at the City of Emar in the Late Bronze Age
G. Beckman Samas among the Hittites 129
T. Scheucher Errors and Mistakes: The Narrow Limits of Orality- 137
Literacy Research in the Study of Ancient Cultures -
The Case of Lexical Lists from Ancient Hattusa
V
W. Waal Reading between the Lines: Hittite Scribal Conventions 147

LITERACY, SCHOOLING AND THE TRANSMISSION OF
KNOWLEDGE IN EARLY MESOPOTAMIAN CULTURE
*
Piotr Michalowski
The invitation that brought us to this symposium called for a discussion of the theory and
transmission of knowledge, a broad topic that has rarely been addressed seriously by Assyriologists,
even though it has been the subject of spirited debate by scholars in other fields.1 In answer to this I
take the topic of transfer to mind quite literally, but limit my remarks to written evidence from
Mesopotamia in the Old Babylonian period.2 I will also make a distinction between the diffusion of
written texts and the handing down and dissemination of knowledge in ancient societies.
The call for the symposium presupposes an implicit understanding of the concept of
"knowledge", but the vagueness of the term makes one wonder what exactly is the subject of the
proposed transfer. Presumably the concept of "knowledge" covers everything from the practical
understanding of how to address elders, light a fire, how to manipulate and understand written
language, textual exegesis, or how to speculate on theology. Because of the elusiveness of the term,
I shall assume that we are really talking about the concept of culture as it was at one time used in
old-fashioned anthropology, but this does not necessarily provide an easy solution. If knowledge is
essentially another word for culture, one might then simply define it as the "nonhereditary memory
of the community, a memory expressing itself in a system of constraints and prescriptions".3 This is
a very broad definition; moreover, there is a vigorous debate among specialists in the ethnography
of education about the complex ways in which humans transmit culture from generation to
generation, and just about the only thing that there is agreement upon is that "humans learn
polyphasically ..., that is, simultaneously through multiple modalities: visually, aurally, olfactorily,
tactilely, kinesthetically, and, of course, cognitively".4 If one accepts this formulation, it is obvious
that philology and archaeology will only provide limited access to relevant information;
nevertheless, it is important periodically to list the potential limits of information in ancient
societies.5 It is also imperative to remind ourselves of the fact that oral schooling - formal and
informal - can exist without writing or coexist with it, and that much knowledge and information
*
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor: piotrm@umich.edu
1 This text is a slightly expanded version of the paper presented at the conference; I deal with these
issues in more detail in my forthcoming book on The Birth of Literature and the Death of Kings. Just before
this manuscript was completed Steve Tinney kindly provided me with a copy of a forthcoming essay that
deals with many of the same issues from a very different point of view.
2 For a short, but inspired essay on some aspects of Mesopotamian transmission of knowledge see
Foster 2005, who also deals with later traditions. The social and technical aspects of literacy and schooling
are quite different after the middle of the second millennium and are not discussed here.
3 Lotman, Uspensky and Mihaychuk 1978, 213.
4 Dobbert et al. 1984, 276. For a detailed classic study see Cavalli-Svorza and Feldman 1981.
5 Civil 1980.

40 P. MICHALOWSKI
can be transmitted from generation to generation in such contexts.6 Indeed, it is possible to teach
extremely difficult and subtle matters in non-literate environments; this is perhaps best illustrated
in Thomas Gladwin's classic study of the initiation of young Polynesian children into the
complexities of open-sea navigation in traditional vessels.7 I mention this only to observe that one
has to place "tablet learning" within a broader educational nexus in ancient Mesopotamian societies,
even though we shall probably never be able to reconstruct such networks from the surviving
information.
The native literary texts offer the viewpoint of the learned specialists: various forms of
knowledge were taught by the gods to privileged individuals or sages, or were retrieved by unique
heroes from a special time before the flood; but only schooling offered the opportunity for adepts to
master special knowledge that was available exclusively within the domains associated with
writing.8 Seduced by the native glorification of the arts of writing and because much of what we
know about ancient Mesopotamia derives from the analysis of cuneiform tablets, we associate the
diffusion of knowledge with the transmission of texts in space and in time; some have referred to
this as the "stream of tradition",9 although the line of this tradition is much more broken and
fragmented than would appear at first glance, and it might be better to think of it as an ebb and flow
of multiple traditions. But if the transmission of texts is not really equivalent to the transmission of
knowledge in the broader sense, then is it only a vehicle for the diffusion of a highly circumscribed
specialized mode of understanding that may or may not be intrinsically different from other
avenues of cultural diffusion prevalent in broader social frameworks? In the pages that follow I will
comment on some of these issues, avoiding a presentation of the native views discussed most
elegantly by Benjamin Foster.10
The philological project often obliterates this broader context and creates an ontological
fantasy in which a textual corpus is a complete, bounded semantic world. Consider the example of
Old Babylonian Sumerian-language Mesopotamian literature: we often analyze the various
compositions of this "corpus" as a closed universe of literary reference, in which texts are vehicles
that contain cultural information and knowledge. In the past this material was treated as "literature",
very much in the modern sense, but more recently it has become current to focus more narrowly on
the strictly educational use of the texts.11 Simply put, it means that all the Sumerian language
compositions that we label as word lists, myths, epics, debates, divine and royal hymns et cetera,
were used only to teach young boys - and in exceptional circumstances young girls - how to read
and write and were not otherwise utilized in any manner by adults other than by those who were
engaged in preparing and editing instructional materials and those who actually taught the next
generation. Moreover, many scholars now believe that these texts were learned by rote
memorization and only committed to writing in exercise fashion,12 although a case can be made
6 Akinnaso 1992.
7 Gladwin 1970.
8 Foster 2005, 247.
9 Oppenheim 1964, 13.
10 Foster 2005.
11 E.g. Tinney 1999, Volk 1996, George 2005.
12 Delnero 2006, 106.

LITERACY, SCHOOLING AND TRANSMISSION OF KNOWLEDGE 41
that in some learning environments direct copying from model tablets must have also been part of
educational practice; this method of learning would become more prevalent in later periods. Such
methods of instruction involve specific mental and physical processes, but the surviving
documentation does not provide many clues concerning the cognitive aspects of such learning
practices, nor does it give us access to the oral instruction, hermeneutic explanations and cultural
commentary that must have accompanied the memorization and writing of specific exercises.
Because of the limitations of the surviving documentation it is difficult to conceive of such learning
in terms of "knowledge transfer" other than in strictly instrumental terms.
The interpretation of these "literary" texts is very much a function of the way that they are
classified. Most of us currently use a broad, ill-defined taxonomy that distinguishes documents,
inscriptions, and literary texts, further subdividing each category into "generic" categories such as
"inheritance documents", "myths" or "epics," although there is much variation in the use of
terminology and taxonomy. The distinctions made in this manner are somewhat arbitrary and are
often heuristically less than useful. Much attention has been spent on the traditional definition of
genres, native and modern, and thus on classificatory matters, but what we really need is a
thorough investigation of what Paul Friedrich has described as "linguacultural" phenomena:
... the many sounds and meanings of what we conventionally call "language" and "culture"
constitute a single universe of its own kind, the parts of which are bound at least as much to
each other as to anything else outside that universe. It is one universe not only in terms of
analysis but also in terms of the point of view that is implied by the discourse and actions
of the participants. I am talking about a domain of experience that fuses and intermingles
the vocabulary, many semantic aspects of grammar, and the verbal aspects of culture; both
grammar and culture have underlying structure while they are constantly being used and
constructed by actual people on the ground.13
Such an ethnographic approach to language use can be fruitful in the study of cultural praxis in oral
as well as written situations that can be observed without much difficulty,14 but is more difficult to
analyse in cultures for which we have only limited textual and archaeological information. We are
all aware that in the teaching environments of Nippur, Ur, Isin, Uruk, Sippar, Mari, Susa and other
places that used a similar curriculum, the majority of literary texts, but not the learning setting,
were usually formulated in the non-mother tongue, the Sumerian language that many of these
children would never again use in their lives. This is why the discussion of issues such as the death
of Sumerian are actually of immense importance, even if there is little consensus on the date and
mechanism of this process.15 Upon graduation, some of the young literates would have many
occasions to practise the skills they had learned, mainly the use of the cuneiform script, but these
would have to be adjusted for practical use in another language, Akkadian, and for purposes that
were only studied in passing in school: the writing of bills, contracts, letters, and similar documents.
These remarks concern only the eighteenth-century BC schooling establishments of
Mesopotamia and surrounding regions that were almost exclusively focused on the study of
13 Friedrich 1989, 306.
14 E.g. Risager 2006.
15 Michalowski 2006, Woods 2006, Rubio 2006.

42 P. MICHALOWSKI
Sumerian, but there are some indications that not all teaching was as broadly conceived as this. One
stark example of a more restricted, practical curriculum is found about a century earlier further
north in the area that what would later be Assyria.
The Old Assyrian case may be unusual, by ancient Near Eastern standards, but it is highly
instructive. Between 1974 and 1813 BC, merchant families from the city of Assur spread out to
towns to the west, and perhaps elsewhere, where they took up residence in groups and conducted a
vigorous trade in cloth and metals, creating an extensive network that reached far into Anatolia.16
The best-documented post was at Kultepe, ancient Kanesh, where the Assyrian merchant suburbs
surrounded the citadel ruled by a local leader. More than twenty-three thousand documents and
letters have been recovered from the houses of these entrepreneurs, written in an Assyrian dialect
of the Akkadian language by means of a simplified repertoire of cuneiform signs. There are good
reasons to believe that many, if not most of these merchants could read and write, and there is also
evidence for local training in cuneiform.17 It is instructive that letters composed by Assyrians living
in Babylonia were formulated in the dialect as well as the cuneiform characters characteristic of the
Old Assyrian way of writing, as evidenced by examples from Nuzi, Eshnunna, Nippur and perhaps
Sippar, suggesting that the travelling entrepreneurs personally wrote these epistles, rather than
relying on local scribes.18 Moreover, unlike other places in late-third and early-second Western
Asia, some entrepreneurial Old Assyrian women could read and write.19 While some elite women
were schooled here or there, the only other place where such practices were generalized was the
special neighbourhood in Old Babylonian Sippar that was occupied by elite women consecrated to
the sun god, Shamash.20
To be sure, this evidence is hardly abundant, but what there is of it tells an interesting story.
The scraps of didactic word lists recovered at Kanesh are similar, but not identical to the ones we
know from other parts of the ancient Near East.21 They are not written in the "literary hand", but
resemble the "documentary hand" of contemporary letters and accounts, and the lexical fragments
deal only with practical matters: the names of metals, numbers, and similar issues that were
pertinent to the practical application of writing. The small number of literary texts found at Kanesh
may not be part of scribal or personal literacy training at all; they were all found one or two at a
time, and most of them are incantations, which suggests that they were in these houses for
functional purposes.
The Old Assyrian case demonstrates that one could learn cuneiform without mastering the
older, culturally obsolescent Sumerian classics. It is possible that a similar case may be
documented at Old Babylonian Tel ed-Der, ancient Sippar-Amnanum. Excavations in a house that
at one time belonged to a priest by the name of Ur-Utu brought to light many cuneiform tablets,
16 For a comprehensive overview, with earlier literature, see Veenhof 2008.
17 Michel 2008, 351.
18 See C. Walker 1980. On the tablets from Nuzi see Lewy 1938.
19 Michel 2008, 351.
20 On Sippar see Lion and Robson 2005, Lion 2009; the latter also summarizes the scant evidence
for elite female literacy in Old Babylonian times. See also Waetzoldt 2009, 263 and Charpin 2009, 267-268
for Ur III and Old Babylonian times, respectively.
21 On Old Assyrian texts that document the learning of writing see Hecker 1993 and, most recently,
Michel 2008, 348-351, with earlier literature.

LITERACY, SCHOOLING AND TRANSMISSION OF KNOWLEDGE 43
including around eighty school exercises, all belonging to the elementary level of education,
without a single extract from a literary text.22
Other examples of such limited practical Old Babylonian scribal training exist, but the
archaeological documentation is sketchy and incomplete, requiring interpretive caution. The
evidence from Kish suggests that at least two trenches on the Ingharra mound (C-10 and 11)
produced only elementary exercises, while other areas yielded a broader mixture of school texts.23
Similarly, the 1966-67 excavations at the "Ville Royale" are of Susa brought to light thirty-three
elementary exercises.24 These come from four different layers, dating from Ur III through Old
Babylonian times, and come from various houses, but they are all of the elementary type, and it is
possible that the supposed early dating of some is an illusion that was created by shifting of
elements and features. Earlier excavations at Susa produced evidence for the use of Old Babylonian
Sumerian literature in schooling environments, but the exact location of the discovery of these
tablets is either unknown or currently unavailable. Although all of this information is incomplete, it
does suggest that the kind of limited elementary instruction documented in the house of Ur-Utu
was most likely practiced elsewhere in Old Babylonian times.
It is always possible that the children who produced these drills moved on to more
advanced learning elsewhere, but it is equally probable that this may have been the full extent of
their studies and that they then applied their new skills to writing documents and letters in the
Akkadian language. Until now there have been few preserved trances of practical training in
preparation for daily scribal practice, but a recent publication provides examples of instruction in
Akkadian letter writing from the Old Babylonian period.25 Almost all of these are unprovenanced
and therefore without any archival context; it is therefore impossible to know what else the adepts
who wrote them had studied alongside the epistolary examples.
The native literary tradition preserves a point of view that privileges the practical, non-
literary aspects of scribal education. Most instructive is an Old Babylonian school composition
used at Nippur and Ur that recounts an idealized dialogue between a teacher and a student.26 The
discourse begins with a series of questions about the Sumerian language, but then goes on to
describe, in the words of the apprentice, the skills that he has acquired during his education (ll. 11-
14):27
"[The texts] in Sumerian and Akkadian, from the (elementary sign list) a-a (or) me-me
[To ...] I have recited and written.
All the individual lines (of text) from (the list of personal names) dInin-tes
22 Tanret 2002.
23 Ohgama and Robson 2010, 210-222.
24 Tanret and De Graef 2010.
25 Wilson 2008. Three Akkadian letter exercises were excavated at Kish; see Ohgama and Robson
2010, 214-216. For previously known practice letters see Michalowski 1983, 222-227.
26 Civil 1985.
27 My translation is based on the text established by Civil 1985, 69-72; for somewhat different
renderings see Sjoberg 1976, 162 and Vanstiphout 1997, 592.

44 P. MICHALOWSKI
Through the commentaries28 up to the (professional name list) lu = su, I have written."
He then summarizes his knowledge (ll. 40-48):
"Having been in school for the prescribed time
I have achieved (mastery) of Sumerian, of the scribal art, of the meaning of texts, of
counting and accounting-
I can even speak Sumerian!"
(The teacher answers:)
"That may be, but what if (the meaning of) Sumerian is hidden to you?"
(The apprentice continues:)
I want to proceed to write tablets:
Tablet(s) of grain measures from one to 600;
Tablet(s) (of weights) from one shekel to twenty mina;
As well as any marriage contracts someone might bring;
Partnership contracts - I can specify verified weights up to a talent;
(Records of) house, garden, and slave sales;
(Of) security pledges, field rentals [...];
(For) palm growing [...];
Adoption contracts - all these I can write."
But although the text is itself a Sumerian language composition, embedded among other school
literary texts, the standard curricular literature is never mentioned in this specific dialogue. Rather,
the schooling that is described here conforms more to the more practically oriented cursus of the
type documented, in part, in the house of Ur-Utu at Sippar Amnanum.29 The fictional student in the
dialogue began with the first lists that introduced the cuneiform script, known in modern parlance
as Syllable Alphabet A and B, listed here by their respective first entries, a-a and me-me,30
followed by a list of personal names and the well-attested list of professional names lu = su/a.31
But there is a curious contradiction here: the two texts were never used together; the latter was
taught only at Nippur and the former in most other places that have provided evidence of Old
Babylonian scribal learning, including Ur, Uruk, Isin, Larsa, Kish, Sippar Amnanum, Sippar
Jahrurum, Eshnunna and Shaduppum.32 This may suggest that the dialogue either originated
outside Nippur, or was designed to accommodate different traditions; but whatever its origins, this
text describes only the practical - in some contexts elementary - stage of instruction that consisted
of basic signs lists, a few lexical texts as well as possibly model contracts. After this the idealized
28 Or "traditional explanations." This interpretation follows Civil 1985, 74; Veldhuis 2006, 26
prefers to interpret nig-zi-gal eden-na ("wild animals of the desert") as a reference to line 328 of the
third tablet of the Old Babylonian thematic lexical text HAR-ra (Nippur version). On this personal names list
see now Peterson 2011, 248-249.
29 Other literary compositions that deal with the "school" likewise refer mainly to training in the
recording of economic matters rather than to the study of poetry; see, for example, Vanstiphout 1989, 589, ll.
20-23; 591, ll. 588-593. See also Sjoberg 1976, 165.
30 M. Cig, H. Kizilyay and Landsberger 1959.
31 Civil 1969.
32 Veldhuis 1997, 43; Lion and Robson 2005, 41.

LITERACY, SCHOOLING AND TRANSMISSION OF KNOWLEDGE 45
apprentice expected to obtain work for the elites, either for entrepreneurs or for one of the state or
temple organizations, apparently without any need to study the Sumerian poetic classics.33
Other lines of evidence may support the supposition that the fuller version of scribal
training, that is the study of advanced lexical texts and literature, was more limited in Old
Babylonian times than one might think. Although most known exercise tablets that were the
products of this kind of education derive from badly recorded late-nineteenth and early-twentieth
century archaeological explorations or are unprovenanced, that was purchased and deposited in
museums, there are enough clues to suggest that all of these come from a limited number of houses,
and that there were only small numbers of advanced teaching establishments in each city. The one
properly excavated schooling house that can be used as an example of such a place was excavated
in Nippur, and it contained approximately two thousand student exercise tablets.34 Published and
unpublished descriptions of the first archaeological work in that city lead to the conclusion that the
late-nineteenth explorers working there had found a small number of such houses, each of which
contained thousands of tablets.35 A similar establishment was found by the French expedition to
Sippar.36 The situation at Ur is also somewhat difficult to unravel, because of the incomplete
recording of find spots, but there too the Old Babylonian school tablets come from a very small
number of houses.37 Likewise, it is possible that many of the unprovenanced texts of a similar
nature that made their way to museums such as the Louvre, the Ashmolean Museum, or the Yale
Babylonian Collection were discovered by looters in only a small number of houses, but were
dispersed when they were sold.38
The better-documented school model involved, as already mentioned, the study of word
lists as well as texts that we normally describe as literature, although many comparative literature
types would argue that this is an anachronistic use of the term, as literature as we know it was
invented only a few hundred years ago. Without entering into that discussion, let me briefly address
the two types of texts - lexical lists, and belles-lettres - in terms of the transmission of knowledge.
Word lists are already to be found among the oldest writings from Mesopotamia, the 3200
BC tablets from Uruk, where they constitute approximately 15% of the 5000 or so recovered items.
Some of them are organized by topics, woods, metals, occupations and titles et cetera, while others
are arranged by the shape of the signs themselves.39 In the past theorists of literacy ascribed many
strange metaphysical qualities to such lists, arguing that they were characteristic of written culture,
and were indicative of the kind of changes in human thought brought about by writing itself, as
they served to organize the cognitive mapping of the surrounding world. Most us today recognize
33 It is possible that some basic scribal training did involve copying of the occasional one or two line
excerpt from a Sumerian poem on round exercise tablets (Falkowitz 1983/84). Most of the known tablets of
this type have no exact provenance; at Nippur they were found in a few houses together with more advanced
literary studies (Ohgama and Robson 2010, 211, n. 12), but many unprovenanced examples may have
originated in different environments.
34 Robson 2001.
35 Michalowski 2011, 39.
36 Scheil 1902, 30-54.
37 Ludwig 2009, 7-9.
38 Tinney, 2011.
39 Civil 1977.

46 P. MICHALOWSKI
that these lists are not encyclopaedias, as has sometimes been asserted, nor are they templates for
ordering the perceived universe, but are, more prosaically, basic learning tools organized in manner
that is geared to paedagogical rather than to philosophical ends.40 They are common among the
earliest-known tablets because without them proto-cuneiform would have been a fleeting one-
generation invention: they are the reproductive organs of the notational system.41 Because lexical
texts are the central components of the elementary stages of learning cuneiform, they have a wider
distribution than the literary exercise texts.
Not only are these lists less salient culturally than many have theorized, they are also not
necessarily characteristic of written tradition, as has often been maintained, even if their production
can be facilitated by writing. The ethnographic record strongly disproves this claim, as noted by a
number of researchers. As noted recently by Anthony Webster, there are good ethnographic
examples of the use of lists in oral discourse;42 indeed, he concludes: "the list did not begin with
writing."
The lexical lists were first constructed as simple teaching tools, but they eventually grew
quite long and one could argue that they expanded their mission to include a cataloguing of the
lexical picture of the world. In eighteenth-century Mesopotamia, however, their broader semantic
function would have been somewhat limited, as these lists of foreign words, couched in the
Sumerian language that was not their mother tongue, were memorized by youngsters who would
have had little use for them outside of the school environment. To learn the Sumerian names of
hundreds of deities, stones, or plants may have been a practical way of memorizing cuneiform
signs and developing cognitive skills, but it generated little that we might call second-degree
knowledge. There is evidence, however, as Miguel Civil has observed, that although Old
Babylonian lexical texts are for the most part monolingual, some, if not all were probably
memorized in bilingual fashion, so that the student learned both the Sumerian and Akkadian names
of things in the world.43 But is this really something that we could call cultural knowledge?
Bearing in mind that these were urban children, we must make a distinction between
learning the names of things, and the practical knowledge that goes with them. For example, the
first big thematic list students learned in Nippur consisted of the names of lexemes denoting types
of wood, broadly conceived, as well as of objects made from such materials.44 If we compare this
kind of learning with the transmission of ethno-botanical labels and taxonomies in traditional
societies, it is clear that the schools were not teaching the kind of knowledge that one would
acquire in a non-school environment in the countryside.45 Moreover, it is clear from comparative
work, that most knowledge of this kind is patently local, that is, that it is deeply embedded in the
lived environment. Indeed, Robert McCormack Adams has been warning us for some time that we
40 Veldhuis 1996.
41 Michalowski 1996.
42 Webster 2006, 302.
43 Civil 1979, 85; Veldhuis 1999, 109.
44 I am referring to the lexical composition that begins with the word gis-taskarin; in Old
Babylonian Nippur this was the first part of the thematic lexical lists that were later redacted as HAR-ra =
hubullu; in the later bilingual version this is tablet III of the series. See Veldhuis 1997.
V
45 There is an enormous literature on this subject; see, for a good recent example, Lozada et al., 2006.

LITERACY, SCHOOLING AND TRANSMISSION OF KNOWLEDGE 47
should be careful when evaluating the depth of technical cultural knowledge of scribes who were
writing in elite urban environments and whose experience of life in the countryside and on the
margins of the cultivated areas may have been quite limited or even non-existent.46
Let me take this further and bring into the discussion a seemingly practical Sumerian
language literary composition that constituted a part of the basic curriculum in Nippur and in other
cities that shared the same learning cursus in Old Babylonian times. There is a Sumerian literary
work that we refer to today as "The Farmer's Instructions" that describes how one should go about
preparing a field for planting, putting in the crops, harvesting, and so on.47 The composition, known
from more than forty manuscripts, was among the basic texts utilized in the eighteenth-century
schools at Nippur and elsewhere. It is obvious that this kind of information, and the outdated
Sumerian farming lexicon that is its vehicle, would hardly have been very useful to someone who
actually worked the land, and would only have provided a rough educational taste of country life
for urban students and a narrative elaboration of the technical vocabulary that was acquired from
the word lists. This kind of impractical decontextualized knowledge may have sometimes been the
object of scorn. As Foster explains:
Some scribes may have seen knowing the vocabulary as mastery of the essence of the
profession, but a Babylonian spoof in which a "learned" man lectures a cleaner in scientific,
detailed technical vocabulary on how to clean his garment, and is told by the cleaner to
wash it himself, warns against taking such a view too seriously.48
But even if it were the subject of ancient humour, one cannot deny that this form of education did
impart specific, practical knowledge, and central to this was what would much later be referred to
as reading, writing, and arithmetic. Mathematical knowledge that was taught in Old Babylonian
schooling establishments was not only theoretical, but practical as well, and presumably could be
of some use later in life for those who needed it.49 As Friberg has recently demonstrated, there is
evidence of real-life application of such learning already in Ur III times.50 On the other hand, there
are limitations to the scope and intensity of the application of theoretical knowledge in real-life
situations and obvious imbalances between practical interest and knowledge outside schooling
environments.
As Adams has observed, there is a marked contrast between the detailed recording of many
of the crucial steps in the production of textiles and the general indifference to the elementary
processes of animal husbandry in Ur III record keeping.51 This reflects, once again, the limited
purview of elite officials, and also the social, intellectual, as well as technological divide between
many of the residents of centrally located villages, towns and cities and those living in the outlying,
46 Adams 1981, 136; Adams 2008, 8.
47 Civil 1994.
48 Foster 2005, 250.
49 On school training in mathematics and surveying see also Sjoberg 1976, 167-168. For an
analytical study of Mesopotamian mathematical training see Proust 2007.
50 Friberg 2009.
51 Adams 2006.

48 P. MICHALOWSKI
often uncontrolled pastoral areas in which many of the flocks grazed full-time or part of the year.
As Adams sees this, in Ur III times:
The pattern presented for sheep husbandry reflects, in short, a prevailing concern on the
part of the bureaucracy only for delivering the requisite outputs of wool and meat to further
industrial processing or to elite consumers and shrines, and a reciprocal detachment and
indifference with regard to even the most basic hazards, needs and personnel requirements
of herd management.52
Perhaps more significant, in the context of this discussion, are the elusive traces of interpretive and
speculative linguistic and philological commentary that must have accompanied some of the rote
learning that is documented by the surviving student exercises.53 Some of these commentaries may
be traces of scholarly speculation that may have not involved the average student, while others may
simply document the idiosyncrasies of individual instructors or of additional work of exceptional
students. This kind of study marked school learning as a form of specialized knowledge, distinct
from practical knowledge that everyone acquired at home or in the neighbourhood by means of
everyday experience and through apprenticeship.54 Finally, and perhaps most importantly, in the
process of learning the various royal hymns, city laments, heroic tales of legendary kings, and other
poems imbued with historicist essence, the young students were exposed to a constructed past that
was designed to instil a sense of cultural unity and a feeling of belonging to a broader
Mesopotamian identity. It did not matter that many of these poems were really not very old, or had
been heavily redacted over the centuries; the history of texts such as The Sumerian King List was
hardly precise, but national histories never really are.
The type of schooling available in the Old Babylonian Nippurean learning establishments
was limited to certain types of texts and only utilized occasional exercises drawn from the worlds
of liturgy, magic, and divination, that is from domains that were nevertheless the provinces of
literate specialists. Let me offer one salient example. It has rarely been observed that during the
first millennium and a half of Mesopotamian literacy there are hardly any tablets containing texts
that were utilized in the temples of Sumer. Administrative documents provide evidence for
elaborate ritual, regular and exceptional, inside the temples but also in other places on special
occasions. And yet, with the exception of short incantations, we cannot reconstruct the hymns and
prayers that were an essential element in the worship of and communication with the transcendent
sphere of experience. Hymns to deities were a part of Ur III and Old Babylonian education, but,
with minor exceptions, there are no liturgical texts from Nippur, Ur, Uruk, Isin and the other places
that have yielded large numbers of Sumerian literary compositions from the eighteenth century,
tablets that are now universally assumed to come from teaching establishments.
There are two exceptions to this. The first is a small collection of Nippur tablets, all
written in a similar small script, that Steve Tinney thinks probably come from one house in the city,
52 Adams 2006, 165.
53 Civil 2009.
54 Akinnaso 1992, 82.

LITERACY, SCHOOLING AND TRANSMISSION OF KNOWLEDGE 49
perhaps the collection of one priest or collector,55 and Old Babylonian liturgical compositions that
are found in other cities, but are often difficult to localize or date with precision. Their exceptional
nature sets them apart and reinforces the fact that such materials were not otherwise committed to
writing in Nippur at the time. More important are the unprovenanced Old Babylonian liturgical
texts, as well as smaller numbers from sites such as Kish, Sippar and Babylon. Tinney notes that
altogether there may be approximately three hundred such tablets, and almost all of them contain
unique compositions.56 If I may be permitted to repeat an old argument of mine, I would like to
suggest two possible explanations for the sudden appearance of these liturgical materials in the
middle of the Old Babylonian period. The first is that such texts were actually written in some parts
of Mesopotamia before the eighteenth century, but have not as yet been discovered. This is partly
an argument based on silence, but because literary tablets are difficult to date with precision, it may
also be the case that some texts that we actually have come from earlier in the period. One such
group of materials consists of a small collection of syllabically written liturgical texts discovered
during the old French excavations in Girsu, which have not received much attention in the
scholarly literature, perhaps because of philological difficulties.57 The date of these texts is
uncertain, however. Krecher described them as early Old Babylonian, and that is how they have
been cited ever since.58 In his original publication of the tablets, Thureau-Dangin thought that they
resembled "early Isin" tablets from Nippur59 - texts that are now recognized as probably written in
the time of Samsuiluna, several generations later. In other words, it is difficult, without further
study, to maintain that these Girsu fragments are the earliest known Sumerian liturgical poems.
Like the high Old Babylonian texts of similar content they appear to have been found as a group
unaccompanied by standard school fare.
The second, more radical explanation of this state of affairs is the one that I prefer as a
working hypothesis. In brief, I have previously suggested that until around 1730 BC, the liturgical
texts of the temple cults were transmitted orally from generation to generation, without the
utilization of the medium of writing. In 1741 all the major urban centres of southern Mesopotamia
revolted against Babylonian dominance and for approximately two years they formed a loose
confederation of local rulers under the leadership of one Rim-Sin, who apparently came from the
old cult centre of Kesh. The Babylonian king Samsuiluna brutally put down the rebellion, and in
the course of the battles over hegemony, much of civil life was disrupted in the south, leading to an
exodus of many people, including the elites, to cities in the north such as Kish and Sippar.60
Although Babylon prevailed, over the next two decades life in the area of the revolt deteriorated,
and by the end of Samsuiluna's reign all the major urban centres of the south appear to have been
abandoned to some degree and would not be fully reoccupied for three or four hundred years, even
if recent scholarship suggests that we may have somewhat exaggerated the effect of these events.
55 Tinney 2011, 585; the archive "gives the impression of being a collection of texts written as part
of internship training".
56 Tinney 2001, 586.
57 Thureau-Dangin 1914.
58 Krecher 1966, 14.
59 Thureau-Dangin 1914, 198.
60 On these events see now Seri 2012 with earlier literature.

50 P. MICHALOWSKI
As Thomas Richter and now Stephanie Dalley have recently argued,61 Nippur and other southern
cities were not completely depopulated at the time, as one had thought until now; nevertheless, one
cannot deny that there was much disruption in the urban social fabric of much of southern
Mesopotamia at the time. There is evidence that cults of deities that had been at home in these
cities, together with their human caretakers, were moved north and reinstituted in new
surroundings.62 This is, in all likelihood, the moment at which the writing down of cultic materials
was accelerated, at a time when the normal transmission of knowledge was interrupted and
endangered by displacement, social chaos and uncertainty.
The scenario I have outlined here brings to mind situations in other cultures, most notably
the issue of writing down learned oral traditions in India. As described by my colleague Donald
Lopez:
For a tradition that bases itself on the power of the word (in an increasingly unintelligible
language, Vedic), that power being invested in those who can intone it, the introduction of
writing breaks the unbroken lineage of authenticity of the recital and repetition of the word,
disrupts the self-perpetuation both of truth and society where authority is passed from
father to son. Writing permits the absence of the speaker and the sound and, as Socrates
warns, allows dissemination of knowledge among those from whom it should be
restricted.63
The consequences of such processes must be taken seriously, even though we have little direct
evidence for them. In view of their hypothetical nature, we must ascertain what this entails for our
understanding of the social embedding of knowledge and literacy, indeed for our very
understanding of the semiotics of cuneiform in early Mesopotamia and for the kind of
understanding of communication that Friedrich calls "linguacultural". Let us step back and look at
this from a broader perspective: it means that the practical side of religion - the whole cultic sphere
- was preserved and transmitted in oral fashion, restricted to a small number of kin-organized
groups, and transmitted in a genealogical manner, and only rarely committed to writing. The
consequences of this transcend local Assyriological matters and have a bearing on the way in
which we perceive the development of literacy in various societies. In writing about Western
Europe before the seventeenth century, Geraldine Joncich Clifford offers this quasi-generalized
observation:
Literacy becomes culturally significant only when a "literacy consciousness" is internalized
by enough people beyond some priestly or civic elite. This necessitates perceiving literacy
as a valuable tool ... It means that writing - tablets, manuscripts, books - must, figuratively,
be taken out of temples and monasteries where it is treated as holy relics and be given some
circulation among the populace and its wider concerns.64
61 Richter 2004, 280; Dalley 2009, 8-9.
62 See Gasche 1989, with earlier literature.
63 Lopez 1995, 38.
64 Clifford 1984, 472.

LITERACY, SCHOOLING AND TRANSMISSION OF KNOWLEDGE 51
The Mesopotamian situation is quite different, with shifting basic foci of literacy and literary
knowledge, but in early periods the writing is used primarily for accounting and practical use, with
an expansion towards epistolary communication, as well as broader religious use at the beginning
of the second millennium. That means that from a semiotic point of view, religious knowledge in
pre-Samsuiluna Mesopotamia had more in common, as far as conservation, preservation, and
transmission is concerned with domains such as music, healing, midwifery, carpentry, farming, or
botany, than with the kinds of texts that were passed on by written means.
The corollaries of this statement are multifold and I will only address one of them here.
The first one concerns the concept of religious knowledge and how it should be defined in third-
and second-millennium Sumer and Akkad. The earliest narrative texts in cuneiform are found
among the ED III tablets from Fara, Nippur, Abu Salabikh and a handful of other towns, including
Syrian Ebla and Mari.65 As far as one can determine, almost all of these texts are religious in nature,
broadly speaking, as they concern what we would call mythological matters. Although we cannot
fully translate a single one of them, it appears that they relate stories about gods and goddesses in
mythological primeval times, in illo tempore, as Eliade would have it. We have no idea of the
function of these stories, but a small number of incantations aside, not one of them has anything in
common with the kinds of text that were used in the cult in later times. Must we, therefore, assume
that one has to distinguish, on the semiotic as well as the functional level, between something like
the modern categories of cult and myth in third millennium Mesopotamia, or is the means of
transmission, oral versus written, essentially irrelevant?
Much the same holds true for the use of writing among non-priestly experts who
communicated with the transcendent sphere, such as magical healers and divination experts. The
interpretation of relevant texts is much too complex to be discussed here, but I shall only note that
these is evidence to suggest that incantations were not a major part of Nippurite schooling,66 and
while according to Tinney there are more Old Babylonian incantations from Nippur than had
previously been known,67 this does not substantially change the overall picture. A small number of
these incantations were undoubtedly used in the Nippur schooling houses, but the majority of
recovered Old Babylonian examples, most of which are unprovenanced, may not be school texts at
all.68 Likewise, the existing corpus of Old Babylonian omen compendia does not appear to come
from schooling environments.69 In both cases it is possible that many of the texts that have been
recovered were written in the context of the practice of ritual or extispicy and that they are actually
a performative element in such procedures, but this is a matter that I shall have to discuss in detail
elsewhere. The important issue is that these experts were literate, but we do not have any idea of
how they mastered this craft. Did they study the Nippurean curriculum, or were they educated in
some other manner?
65 Krebernik 1998, 313-335.
66 Michalowski 1993.
67 Tinney 2011, 579.
68 There is one incantation tablet with a possible school colophon. I would read Finkel 1999, 250, fig
17 rev. 5-7 as dnidaba, ning den.zu-ga-mi- + il + , dumu x-ba-ra/um, "O Nidaba, belonging to Sin-gamil, son of
x."
69 Michalowski 2009. For a completely different perspective, see Glassner 2009.

52 P. MICHALOWSKI
These are important questions, but they must be set aside for another day. In the present
context, however, the evidence sketched above suggests that rather than speaking about literacy, we
must focus on varieties of literacy in early-second millennium Mesopotamia. Such a heterogeneous
view of literacy may require us to revise our understanding of the broader functions of the process
of learning the seemingly impractical Sumerian language tradition. Some years ago, in the context
of a discussion of the role of Ur III and later bureaucracies, I wrote about this in the following
terms:
The school was an ideological moulder of minds, the place where future members of the
bureaucracy socialized, where they received a common stock of ideas and attitudes which
bound them together as a class and in many ways separated them from their original
background. ...The contents of texts is in many ways irrelevant... It does not matter what
they learned as along as they learned it and it made them different. The conceptual
dimensions of literacy literally made them different human beings: they knew of matters
that others only imagined existed, they even knew what year it was. In such a context the
perpetuation of a dead literary language - Sumerian - has a definite function that helped to
define membership in an exclusive club - the world of the bureaucracy.70
Looking back on this, I think it makes its point too strongly. If I were to be writing this today, I
would maintain the general point that it makes, but would want to limit the scope of these effects.
Half a century ago, Walter Ong proposed the comparison of Renaissance Latin education to
initiation rites, in the sense described many years earlier by van Gennep:
The basic conclusion is that when Latin, in which learning was encoded, became by the
time of the Renaissance a "dead" language - a language which, however widely used, was
divorced from family life - initiation into the language of learning became more than ever a
rite de passage.71
We know much more about Renaissance schooling than we do about similar Old Babylonian
practices, nevertheless it may that the comparison may also hold for certain types of Mesopotamian
educational establishments so that one may hypothesize similar social effects, even if the
instructional processes may have differed substantially. The evidence is undoubtedly incomplete,
but in light of all that has been said above it is quite probable that the full literary Eduba training
that is usually described in discussions of Old Babylonian education may have been available only
to a limited number of elite urban children; some of them may have gone on to work as scribes, but
many of them probably grew up to be high-level administrators working for palace or temple,
entrepreneurs, or both. Their schooling may have been a rite of passage of sorts, in that the
substance of their learning was matched by the socializing effects of common experience and by
the recognition that they were privy to a unique knowledge of the past, linguistic, historical, and
poetic, that marked them as privileged individuals who shared this knowledge as a bond of unity.
70 Michalowski 1987, 54.
71 Ong 1959, 122.

LITERACY, SCHOOLING AND TRANSMISSION OF KNOWLEDGE 53
It is noteworthy that a new scribal title appears during the Old Babylonian period: mar bit
tuppati, written dumu.e.dub.ba.a, literally "child of the school establishment".72 According to
Landsberger "the title was restricted to scribes of the royal administration, especially military
scribes".73 If the bit tuppi/ tuppati (e.dub.ba.a) was not just any schooling establishment, but
only one that taught the full expanded cursus, including judicious selections from the Sumerian
literary corpus, then one might speculate that the general term tupparrum (dub.sar) referred to
anyone who had mastered cuneiform well enough to use this skill in the bureaucracy, but that only
those who had mastered the fuller literary and lexical course of study were entitled to be a mar bit
tuppati.
The complexities of ancient Mesopotamian literacies require a fuller treatment than can be
attempted here, but the recognition of the heterogeneous nature of these literacies, and of different
paths to them, is a prerequisite for any study of the kinds of knowledge that was transmitted by
means of certain kinds of education. Indeed, it is impossible to determine the scope of literacy in
early-second millennium Near Eastern societies, but it may have been much broader than direct
evidence may suggest. The issue is not only who could read and/or write, but also who could, but
chose not to; various social conventions, guild practices, and other matters may have led certain
elite groups to eschew their early education and to rely on others for the practice of this craft on
their behalf.74 It is thus possible that certain highly placed individuals who did not write their own
letters of accounts may have known more about the imaginary Mesopotamian past than did their
scribes, who may have only achieved practical literacy by studying syllabaries and basic writing
exercises, never progressing to exploring the deeds of Gilgamesh or Shulgi.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Adams, R. McCormack, 1981, Heartland of Cities: Surveys of Ancient Settlement and Land Use on the
Central Floodplain of the Euphrates, Chicago.
--, 2006, "Shepherds at Umma in the Third Dynasty of Ur: Interlocutors with a World beyond the Scribal
Field of Ordered Vision", Journal of the Economic and Social History of the Orient 49, 133-169.
--, 2008, "An Interdisciplinary Overview of a Mesopotamian City and its Hinterlands", Cuneiform Digital
Library Journal 1, 1-17.
Akinnaso, F., Niyi, S., 1992, "Schooling, Language, and Knowledge in Literate and Nonliterate Societies",
Comparative Studies in Society and History 34, 68-109.
Bauml, F.H., 1980, "Varieties and Consequences of Medieval Literacy and Illiteracy", Speculum 55, 237-265.
Cavalli-Svorza, L.L., and M.W. Feldman, 1981, Cultural Transmission and Evolution: A Quantitative
Approach, Princeton.
Charpin, D., 2009, "Schreiber (Scribe) B. Altbabylonisch", Reallexikon der Assyriologie 9, 266-269.
Civil, M., 1969, The Series lu = sa and Related Texts, Materials for the Sumerian Lexicon 12, Rome.
72 Stol 2004, 780, Charpin 2009, 266. This is undoubtedly an Old Babylonian neologism. The term
is not found in any earlier text, nor is it included in any contemporary or earlier lexical composition. To my
knowledge it never occurs in any Sumerian literary text outside the Eduba essays and dialogues.
73 Landsberger 1955, 125, no. 22.
74 Bauml 1980, 240-241.

54 P. MICHALOWSKI
--, 1977, "Lexicography", in: Sumerological Studies in Honor of Thorkild Jacobsen, ed. S. Lieberman,
Assyriological Studies 20, Chicago, 123-157.
--, 1979, Ea = naqu, Aa A = naqu, with their Forerunners and Related Texts, Materials for the Sumerian
Lexicon 14, Rome.
--, 1980, "Les limites de l'information textuelle", in: L'archeologie de l'Iraq du debut de l'epoque
neolithique a 333 avant notre ere: perspectives et limites de l'interpretation anthropologique des
documents, ed. M. Barrelet, Colloques internationaux du Centre national de la Recherche scientifique
580, Paris, 225-232.
--, 1985, "Sur les "livres d'ecoliers a l'epoque paleo-babylonienne", in: Miscellanea Babylonica, Melanges
offerts a M. Birot, eds. J.-M. Durand and J.-R. Kupper, Paris, 67-78.
--, 1994, The Farmer's Instructions. A Sumerian Agricultural Manual, Aula Orientalis Supplementa 5,
Sabadell.
--, 2009, "The Mesopotamian Lexical Lists: Authors and Commentators", in: Reconstruyendo el Pasado
Remoto. Estudios sobre el Proximo Oriente Antiguo en homenaje a Jorge R. Silva Castillo /
Reconstructing a Distant Past: Ancient Near Eastern Essays in Tribute to Jorge R. Silva Castillo, eds.
Diego A. Barreyra Fracaroli and Gregorio del Olmo Lete, Sabadell and Barcelona, 65-72.
Collins, J., 1996, "Socialization to Text: Structure and Contradiction in Schooled Literacy", in: Natural
Histories of Discourse, eds. M. Silverstein and G. Urban, Chicago, 203-228.
Clifford, G.J., 1984, "Buch und Lesen: Historical Perspectives on Literacy and Schooling", Review of
Educational Research 54, 472-500.
Cig, M., H. Kizilyay and B. Landsberger, 1959, Zwei altbabylonische Schulbucher aus Nippur, Ankara.
Dalley, S., 2009, Babylonian Tablets from the First Sealand Dynasty in the Schoyen Collection, Cornell
University Studies in Assyriology and Sumerology 9, Bethesda.
Delnero, P., 2006, "Variation in Sumerian Literary Compositions: A Case Study Based on the Decad",
University of Pennsylvania Doctoral Dissertation.
Dobbert, M.L., R.A. Eisikovits, M.A. Pitman, J.K. Gamradt and Kyung-soo Chun, 1984, "Cultural
Transmission in Three Societies: Testing a Systems-Based Field Guide", Anthropology & Education
Quarterly 15, 275-311.
Falkowitz, R.S., 1983/84, "Round Old Babylonian Tablets from Nippur", Archiv fur Orientforschung 29/30,
18-43.
Finkel, I.L., 1999, "On Some Dog, Snake and Scorpion Incantations", in: Mesopotamian Magic: Textual,
Historical, and Interpretative Perspectives, eds. I. Tzvi Abusch and K. van der Toorn, Groningen, 211-
252.
Foster, B.R., 2005, "Transmission of Knowledge", in: A Companion to the Ancient Near East, Daniel Snell,
London, 245-252.
Friberg, J., 2009, "A Geometric Algorithm with Solutions to Quadratic Equations in a Sumerian Juridical
Document from Ur III Times", Cuneiform Digital Library Journal 2009/3.
Friedrich, P., 1989, "Language, Ideology, and Political Economy", American Anthropologist 91, 295-312.
Gasche, H., 1989, "La Babylonie au 17e siecle avant notre ere, le Paleo-Babylonien Final: etat actuel et la
question", in: Hermann Gasche, La Babylonie au 17e siecle avant notre ere: approche archeologique,
problemes et perspectives, Mesopotamian History and Environment, Series II, Memoirs I, Gent, 109-147.
George, A.R., 2005, "In Search of the e.dub.ba.a: The Ancient Mesopotamian School in Literature and
Reality", in: "An Experienced Scribe who Neglects Nothing:" Ancient Near Eastern Studies in Honor of
Jacob Klein, Yitschak Sefati, Pinhas Artzi, Chaim Cohen, Barry L. Eichler, and Victor A. Hurowitz,
Bethesda, 127-137.
Gladwin, Th., 1970, East is a Big Bird: Navigation and Logic on Puluwat Atoll, Cambridge.

LITERACY, SCHOOLING AND TRANSMISSION OF KNOWLEDGE 55
Glassner, J.-J., 2009, "Ecrire des livres a l'epoque paleo-babylonienne: le traite d'extispicine", Zeitschrift fur
Assyriologie und vorderasiatische Archaologie 99, 1-81.
Hecker, K., 1993, "Schultexte aus Kultepe", in: Aspects of Art and Iconography: Anatolia and its Neighbors.
Studies in Honor of Nimet Ozguc, eds. Machteld J. Mellink, Edith Porada, and Tahsin Ozguc, Ankara,
281-291.
Krebernik, M., 1998, "Die Texte aus Fara and Tell Abu Salabikh", in: Mesopotamien: Spaturuk-Zeit und
fruhdynastische Zeit, eds. Pascal Attinger and Markus Wafler, Orbis Biblicus et Orientalis 160/1.
Freiburg and Gottingen, 237-427.
Krecher, J., 1966, Sumerische Kultlyrik, Wiesbaden.
Landsberger, B., 1955, "Remarks on the Archive of the Soldier Ubarum", Journal of Cuneiform Studies 9,
121-131.
Lewy, J., 1938, "Notes on Pre-Hurrian Texts from Nuzi", Journal of the American Oriental Society 58, 453-
460.
Lion, B., 2009, "Les femmes scribes de Sippar", in: Femmes, cultures et societes dans les civilisations
mediterraneennes et proche-orientales de l'Antiquite, eds. Francoise Briquel-Chatonnet, Saba Fares,
Brigitte Lion and Cecile Michel, Lyon, 289-303.
Lion, B., and E. Robson, 2005, "Quelques textes scolaires paleobabyloniens rediges par des femmes",
Journal of Cuneiform Studies 57, 37-54.
Lopez Jr., D.S., 1995, "Authority and Orality in the Mahayana", Numen 42, 21-47.
Lotman, Y.M., B.A. Uspensky and George Mihaychuk, 1978, "On the Semiotic Mechanism of Culture", New
Literary History 9, 211-232.
Lozada, M., A. Ladio and M. Weigandt, 2006, "Cultural Transmission of Ethnobotanical Knowledge in a
Rural Community of Northwestern Patagonia, Argentina", Economic Botany 60, 374-385.
Ludwig, M.-Ch., 2009, Literarische Texte aus Ur. Kollationen und Kommentare zu UET 6/1-2,
Untersuchungen zur Assyriologie und vorderasiatischen Archaologie / Erganzungsbande zur Zeitschrift
fur Assyriologie und Vorderasiatische Archaologie 9, Berlin.
Michalowski, P., 1983, "Review of L. Cagni, Briefe aus der Iraq Museum (Leiden, 1980)", Journal of
Cuneiform Studies 35, 221-228.
--, 1987, "Charisma and Control: On Continuity and Change in Early Mesopotamian Bureaucratic Systems",
in: The Organization of Power: Aspects of Bureaucracy in the Ancient Near East, eds. R. D. Biggs and
M. Gibson, Chicago, 55-68.
--, 1993, 'The Early Mesopotamian Incantation Tradition', in: Literature and Language at Ebla, ed. Pelio
Fronzaroli, Quaderni di Semitistica 18, Florence, 305-326.
--, 1996, "Mesopotamian Cuneiform: Origins", in: The World's Writing Systems, eds. P.T. Daniels and W.
Bright, Oxford, 33-36.
--, 2006, "The Lives of the Sumerian Language", in: Margins of Writing, Origins of Cultures, ed. Seth L.
Sanders, Chicago, 159-184.
--, 2009, "Observations on Divination and Extispicy in Early Mesopotamia", Paper read at the 55th
Rencontre Assyriologique Internationale, Paris, July 7, 2009.
--, 2011, The Correspondence of the Kings of Ur: An Epistolary History of an Ancient Mesopotamian
Kingdom, Mesopotamian Civilizations 15, Winona Lake.
Michel, C., 2008, "Ecrire et compter chez les marchands assyriens du debut du IIe millenaire av. J.-C.", in:
Muhibbe Darga Armagani, eds. T. Tarhan, A. Tibet and E. Konyar, Istanbul, 345-364.
--, 2009, "Les femmes et l'ecrit dans les archives paleo-assyriennes", in: Femmes, cultures et societes dans
les civilisations mediterraneennes et proche-orientales de l'Antiquite, eds. Francoise Briquel-Chatonnet,
Saba Fares, Brigitte Lion and Cecile Michel, Lyon, 253-272.

56 P. MICHALOWSKI
Ohgama, N., and E. Robson, 2010, "Scribal Schooling in Old Babylonian Kish: the Evidence of the Oxford
Tablets", in: Your Praise is Sweet: A Memorial Volume for Jeremy Black from Students, Colleagues and
Friends, London, 207-236.
Ong, W.J., 1959, "Latin Language Study as a Renaissance Puberty Rite", Studies in Philology 56, 103-124.
Oppenheim, A.L., 1984 [1st ed. 1964], Ancient Mesopotamia: A Portrait of a Dead Civilization, Chicago.
Peterson, J., 2011, "The Personal Name Lists in the Scribal Curriculum of Old Babylonian Nippur: an
Overview", Zeitschrift fur Assyriologie und vorderasiatische Archaologie 101, 246-273.
Proust, Chr., 2007, Tablettes mathematiques de Nippur, Istanbul.
Richter, Th., 2004 [2nd rev. ed.], Untersuchungen zu den lokalen Panthea Sud- und Mittelbabyloniens in
altbabylonischer Zeit, Altes Orient und Altes Testament 257, Munster.
Risager, K., 2006, Language And Culture: Global Flows And Local Complexity, Clevedon.
Robson, E., 2001, "The Tablet House: A Scribal School in Old Babylonian Nippur", Revue d'assyriologie et
d'archeologie orientale 93, 39-66.
Rubio, G., 2006, "Sulgi and the Death of Sumerian", in: Approaches to Sumerian Literature: Studies in
Honour of Stip (H.L.J. Vanstiphout), eds. Piotr Michalowski and Niek Veldhuis, Leiden, 167-179.
Scheil, V., 1902, Une saison de fouilles a Sippar, Memoires publies par les membres de 1'Institut Francais
d'Archeologie Orientale du Caire 1/1, Cairo.
Seri, A., 2012. The House of Prisoners. Slavery and State in Uruk during the Revolt against Samsu-iluna.
Leiden.
Sjoberg, A.W., 1976, "The Old Babylonian Edubba", in: Sumerological Studies in Honor of Thorkild
Jacobsen on his Seventieth Birthday, June 7, 1974, ed. Stephen J. Lieberman, Assyriological Studies 20,
Chicago, 159-179.
Stol, M., 2004, "Wirtschaft und Gesellschaft in altbabylonischer Zeit", in: Dominique Charpin, Dietz Otto
Edzard and Marten Stol, Mesopotamien: Die altbabylonische Zeit, Orbis Biblicus et Orientalis, 160/4,
Freiburg and Gottingen, 643-975.
Tanret, M., 2002, Per aspera ad astra. L'apprentissage du cuneiforme a Sippar-Amnanum pendant la
periode paleobabylonienne tardive, Mesopotamian History and Environment. Series III Texts 1/2, Gent.
Tanret, M., and K. de Graef, 2010, "The Exercise Tablets from Chantier B in Susa Revisited", Iranica
Antiqua 45, 225-257.
Thureau-Dangin, F., 1914, "Fragments des hymnes", in: Gaston Cros, Leon Alexandre Heuzey and Francois
Thureau-Dangin, Nouvelles fouilles de Tello. Paris, 198-212.
Tinney, S., 1999, "On the Curricular Setting of Sumerian Literature", Iraq 61, 159-172.
--, 2011, "Tablets of Schools and Scholars: A Portrait of the Old Babylonian Corpus", in: The Oxford
Handbook of Cuneiform Culture, eds. Karen Radner and Eleanor Robson, Oxford, 577-596.
Vanstiphout, H.L.J., 1997, "School Dialogues", in: Context of Scripture: Canonical Compositions from the
Biblical World 1, eds. William W. Hallo and K. Lawson Younger, Leiden, 588-593.
Veenhof, K.R., 2008, "The Old Assyrian Period", in: Klaas R. Veenhof and Jesper Eidem, Mesopotamia. The
Old Assyrian Period, Orbis Biblicus et Orientalis 160/5, Freiburg and Gottingen, 19-264.
Veldhuis, N., 1996, "The Cuneiform Tablet as an Educational Tool", Dutch Studies Published by NELL 2,
11-26.
--, 1997, Elementary Education at Nippur. The List of Trees and Wooden Objects, Ph.D. dissertation,
Rijksuniversiteit Groningen.
--, 1999, "Continuity and Change in the Mesopotamian Lexical Tradition", in: Aspects of Genre and Type in
Pre-Modern Literary Cultures, eds. B. Roest and H.L.J. Vanstiphout, Groningen, 101-118.

LITERACY, SCHOOLING AND TRANSMISSION OF KNOWLEDGE 57
--, 2006, "How to Classify Pigs: Old Babylonian and Middle Babylonian Lexical Texts", in: De la
domestication au tabou: Le cas des suides dans le Proche-Orient ancien, eds. B. Lion and C. Michel,
Travaux de la Maison Rene-Ginouves 1, Paris, 25-29.
Volk, K., 1996, "Methoden altmesopotamischer Erziehung nach Quellen der altbabylonischen Zeit",
Saeculum 47, 178-216.
Waetzoldt, H., 1989, "Der Schreiber als Lehrer in Mesopotamien," in: Schreiber, Magister, Lehrer: Zur
Geschichte und Funktion eines Berufsstandes, eds. by J.G.P. v. Hohenzollern and M. Liedtke, Bad
Heilbrunn, 25-50.
Waetzoldt, H., 2009, Schreiber. A. Im 3. Jahrtausend, Reallexikon der Assyriologie 9, 250-266.
Waetzoldt, H., and Antoine Cavigneaux, 2009, Schule. Reallexikon der Assyriologie 9, 294-309.
Walker, Ch., 1980, "Some Assyrians at Sippar in the Old Babylonian Period", Anatolian Studies 30, 15-22.
Webster, A.K., 2006, "Keeping the Word: On Orality and Literacy (With a Sideways Glance at Navajo)",
Oral Tradition 21, 295-324.
Wilson, M., 2008, Education in the Earliest Schools: Cuneiform Manuscripts in the Cotsen Collection. Los
Angeles.
Woods, Ch., 2006, "Bilingualism, Scribal Learning, and the Death of Sumerian", in: Margins of Writing,
Origins of Cultures, ed. Seth L. Sanders, Chicago, 91-120.

# FIGURE (IMAGES)

# BIBLIOGRAPHY

