# METADATA
author: Peters J.P.
source_id:Peters1903_ReviewTheE
title: Review: The Excavation Of Nippur
Year: 1903
Source_ID:  Peters1903_ReviewTheE
Source_Type:  Article in Book: Explorations in Bible Lands during the Nineteenth Century by H. V.Hilprecht, Dr. Benzinger, Dr. Hommel, Dr. Jensen and Dr. Steindorff 
Source_Role,Step_distance: 0,1,2 ,3,4 
Pages: Vol. 7, No. 4 (Oct., 1903), pp. 712-730
Web: 
Published: The University of Chicago Press


# TEXT

Review: The Excavation of Nippur
Reviewed Work(s): Explorations in Bible Lands during the Nineteenth Century by H. V.
Hilprecht, Dr. Benzinger, Dr. Hommel, Dr. Jensen and Dr. Steindorff
Review by: John P. Peters
Source: The American Journal of Theology, Oct., 1903, Vol. 7, No. 4 (Oct., 1903), pp.
712-730
Published by: The University of Chicago Press
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/3153762
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
https://about.jstor.org/terms
The University of Chicago Press is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend
access to The American Journal of Theology
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)151.100.200.66 on Sat, 30 Dec 2023 10:40:41 +00:00(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
712 THE AMERICAN JOURNAL OF THEOLOGY
duces our experience and justifies our estimate of it, and without which
as rational beings we could not continue to have the experience. If
theology is to be stated in terms of life rather than in terms of thought,
it would seem to be an abandonment of his attempt to solve the prob-
lem. The two cannot be compared, and they are not to exist apart. We
certainly can heartily agree that theology should be concrete and for
our own age; but it should never be distressingly indistinct or elusive.
It is always primarily theory and not practice, and needs no apology for
it. It is enough that it be correct and scientific theory, and lead into
wisely devoted life. And we hardly need to be reminded that life,
after all, is not muscular but mental. To imply, therefore, that the
scientific grasp of truth is of less importance than the practical
activities of the every-day Christian, is the practical desertion of the
theological field and the making of Christian sociology the goal
of all our attempts to attain to the Christian idea of God and the
world.
Dr. Brown does not mean this, but by going beyond his historical
study, which is certainly a valuable one, and then failing to give some-
thing definite and conclusive, his book seems to run out into the mists
and shadows. The only adequate explanation would seem to be that
he has intended this volume simply as an introductory study, which he
purposes to follow by another that shall settle all these questions from
his own point of view. We need not assure Dr. Brown that we shall
give such a book a hearty welcome.
ALBERT T. SWING.
OBERLIN COLLEGE.
THE EXCAVATION OF NIPPUR.'
IN the concluding chapter of Niippur, published in 1897, are these
words:
How successfully Mr. Haynes carried out the work which he had planned,
in his long and arduous excavations, covering three years, .... and what
wonderful treasures he unearthed, he has related in another volume. (Vol.
II, p. 372.)
The reference was to a volume by Dr. Haynes, the manuscript of which
was reported at that time as complete, and which was announced by
I'Explorations in Bible Lands during the Nineteenth Century. By H. V. HIL-
PRECHT, with the co-operation of Lic. DR. BENZINGER, PROF. DR. HOMMEL, PROF.
DR. JENSEN, PROF. DR. STEINDORFF. Philadelphia: Holman & Co., 1903. xxiv-
793 pages. $4.
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)151.100.200.66 on Sat, 30 Dec 2023 10:40:41 +00:00(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
THE EXCA VA TION OF NIPPUR 713
Wattles & Co., of Philadelphia, the publishers of the Sunday-School
Times, as about to be issued by them. This volume was for some
reason withdrawn, and now, for the first time, in Explorations in Bible
Lands during the Nineteenth Century, we have from Professor Hilprecht's
pen, a general statement of the results of that expedition, and of
Haynes's second expedition, i899-i900, during the last two months
of which Hilprecht took charge of the work in the field. In addition,
Hilprecht's narrative undertakes to cover also the work previously
done under my direction in I888-90. In other words, this volume
contains a r6sum6 and general presentation of the work done at
Nippur and the results achieved from 1888 to 1900oo. Dr. Hilprecht
makes so severe a criticism of my work and that of Dr. Haynes that,
before proceeding to discuss the archaeological results achieved, I am
obliged to consider his statements as to my methods, and also those of
Dr. Haynes, the responsibility for those methods, and Dr. Hilprecht's
own part in the expedition, its plans and its achievements.
I have related in my Nzppur the inception of the undertaking,
which took formal shape in a meeting held at the house of Provost
Pepper, November 30, 1887. Dr. Hilprecht commences his story of
the expedition with that meeting (pp. 297 ff.). My plans were of the
simplest, since it seemed impossible to obtain funds for a larger enter-
prise until it had been shown that it was practicable, not only to exca-
vate in Babylonia, but also to secure from the Turkish government a
reasonable portion of the objects found. I had been trying for some
years to arouse interest in excavation in Babylonia, and had encoun-
tered a general unwillingness to contribute money without a good
prospect of "tangible results." We were doing pioneer work, and it
was necessary to make a success on a small scale before we could hope
to obtain large contributions.
My plans, as formulated and presented at that time, are not quite
correctly represented in Dr. Hilprecht's volume, as can be seen by refer-
ence to my own statements in the work referred to above. Dr. Hilprecht
claims to have opposed my plans as unscientific and proposed a more
elaborate scheme. I have no recollection of such representations on his
part at that meeting, and my recollections in this point are confirmed
by others. Certainly Hilprecht played no evident part in the matter.
A more elaborate plan was presented a little later, but until the
appearance of the present volume I had supposed that it originated
with Professor Haupt, of Baltimore. This more elaborate plan pro-
posed a larger scientific staff, which was by no means unwelcome to
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)151.100.200.66 on Sat, 30 Dec 2023 10:40:41 +00:00(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
714 THE AMERICAN JOURNAL OF THEOLOGY
me, provided the funds for the purpose could be raised. On the
larger staff which was ultimately adopted, Dr. R. F. Harper, then
instructor in Yale University, was appointed Assyriologist. This was
from no desire to slight Professor Hilprecht, who was at that time my
colleague in the faculty of the University of Pennsylvania. It was
entirely on my recommendation that he had been brought to this
country a short time before, and it was naturally my interest that a
person so recommended by me should receive due recognition. Dr.
Pepper, then provost of the University of Pennsylvania, had assured
me that Professor Hilprecht's health would not allow him to endure
the hardships of a campaign in the field, and Dr. Pepper and I had
planned for him a position of dignity and importance in cohnection
with the work at home, first as secretary of the committee, and secondly
as the person to whom should be assigned the work of publishing the
cuneiform records obtained by the expedition. Somewhat later Dr.
Pepper told me that Professor Hilprecht felt so chagrined at not being
appointed on the staff of the expedition that he believed it would be
worse for his health not to go than to go, and asked if we could not
make a position for him. With the consent of Dr. Harper, Hilprecht
was accordingly appointed on the field staff as a second Assyriologist
(p. 300) and accompanied the first expedition, which conducted exca-
vations for a period of about ten weeks.
On this first expedition, according to his own account, Hilprecht
seems to have determined satisfactorily the topography of the mounds
and to have identified the location of the library (pp. 306-9). I cannot
help thinking that he has recollected forwards. At least neither I nor
any of his other comrades with whom I have been able to communicate
recollect any such identifications as he describes. Outside of the
identification of the site of the ziggurrat, which was made by all of us
on the ground of the prominence and the curious cone shape of the hill
called Bint el-Amir, the only topographical suggestion made by Pro-
fessor Hilprecht which I clearly remember was a theory based on the
results of our earliest trenches, namely: that the complex of mounds
to the east of the great canal dividing the ruins constituted "the city
of the living," and those to the west "the city of the dead." Like
much of our early theorizing, this was soon proved to be false.
The " temple library" was finally found by Haynes, in 1899-1900,
in the northeast corner of the isolated triangular mound at the extreme
southern end of the eastern half of the city, hill No. IV, according to
Hilprecht's lettering in the present volume (p. 305), No. V in my
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)151.100.200.66 on Sat, 30 Dec 2023 10:40:41 +00:00(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
THE EXC VA VA TION OF NIPPUR 715
Nippur and in Hilprecht's Babylonian Expedition of the University of
Pennsylvania.2 Some chance trial trenches conducted by us, in the
first expedition, in the extreme northwestern nose of that mound, not
at Hilprecht's special request, as his memory now says, resulted in the
discovery of a considerable number of tablets and fragments of tablets;
but none of those were then identified by the Assyriologists connected
with the expedition as possessing a literary character. They were
reported to be contract tablets, partly of the Persian and neo-
Babylonian period, and partly of the period of the first Babylonian
dynasty, commonly called that of Hammurabi. It would seem from
Hilprecht's statement that at a later date he discovered among these
fragments some literary remains. This discovery must have been
made, I should suppose, later than the date of Haynes's first expedi-
tion, and indeed Hilprecht's statement in the present volume is the first
information I have received that there was such material in the discov-
eries of the first year. Writing to me under date of October 8, 1889, he
says: "The only good things [discovered by us in the first campaign]
are the text of Naram Sin (three lines) and the astronomical tablet;"
neither of which, so far as we know, were discovered in that mound.
The Ashur-etil-ilani tablets, referred to by Hilprecht (p. 310) as found
in the excavations in this hill and as possessing unusual historical
interest, were also excavated in a different mound, No. VI in my
Nippur, at the extreme north of the complex of mounds on the east
side of the canal. Owing to the discovery of tablets in our first cam-
paign, I conducted during the second campaign much more extensive
excavations at various points in mound IV, finding, on the western
side of the mound, along the edge of the great canal, a large number
of tablets, almost entirely of a business character, dating from about
2500 B. C. on to the Persian period. Trenches in other parts of the
mound produced no result. Among these tablets of the second year
also, Hilprecht, with whom I was in constant communication with
regard to the objects found, does not seem to have discovered any
literary remains up to the close at least of Haynes's first expedition,
and this hill was not, accordingly, included among the places especially
recommended to Haynes for excavation during the years 1893-96.
In the instructions which Hilprecht reports as given to Haynes for his
second expedition, 1899-i900 (p. 430), the examination of this mound
is included, and I suppose, therefore, that by that time Hilprecht had
2It is not clear to me why, in the present volume, Hilprecht has changed the
et tering formerly adopted, thus causing confusion in the comparison of results.
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)151.100.200.66 on Sat, 30 Dec 2023 10:40:41 +00:00(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
716 THE AMERICAN JOURNAL OF THEOLOGY
found, in examining the tablets, the literary material which he refers
to in this volume. The deposit of tablets described as a "temple
library" was actually found by Haynes, on his second expedition, near
the northeast corner of this mound, as stated above, at a depth of from
twenty to twenty-four feet below the surface. Haynes, temporarily
unable to continue work in the temple, had placed his men at the
nearest opposite point on this hill, and there discovered the tablets.
The discovery was made at the very end of 1899, and the tablets con-
taining the library had been excavated before Hilprecht's arrival,
March I, 1900.
Hilprecht regards this entire mound as constituting a temple
library from the period of 2500 B. C. onward. It is not at all clear
that this is the case. As already stated, the tablets found by me on the
western edge of the mound along the canal were almost entirely of a
business character, and nowhere was there any large deposit of tablets.
There were no rooms in which the tablets had been arranged upon
shelves. The only part of the mounds of which that is true is the
small section in the northeast, opposite the temple gate, and at the
time when Haynes stopped work at this place he seemed to have
exhausted the "find" of tablets. Hilprecht speaks also of the dis-
covery of a section of the "library" on the west side of this mound
(p. 512), but his further statements as to Haynes's failure to keep
records and the uncertainty as to the place in which objects supposed
to belong to the library were actually found, raises a question about
these discoveries until we have more certain data; which, as I read, we
have at present only for the northeast corner.
It will be observed that in Hilprecht's present reconstruction of the
topography of Nippur (p. 550) he holds that the two great walls,
Imgur-Marduk and Nimit-Marduk, surrounded only the temple com-
plex. These two walls he believes have been discovered in the great
wall surrounding the immediate temple inclosure, and an outside wall
surrounding the entire temple complex. Now, this latter wall includes
only that portion of the ruins on the east side of the canal north of
this library hill. It certainly seems strange that, if the buildings on
this hill were the temple library and temple schools, they should have
been left outside of the area inclosed within the outside temple walls;
and also that they should have been separated from the temple by a
broad canal. One naturally awaits with much interest the further
examination of this mound, but the results so far obtained do not yet
appear, I think, to justify Hilprecht's conclusion that the whole
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)151.100.200.66 on Sat, 30 Dec 2023 10:40:41 +00:00(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
THE EXCA VA TION OF NIPPUR 717
thirteen acres of this mound constituted a temple library and temple
schools.
But to return to my apologia. Hilprecht represents me as desir-
ing on my second expedition to conduct the excavations alone,
unhampered by expert advice, and as having no interest in any other
work than the collection of portable material, especially tablets, with-
out regard to constructions and the like (pp. 320, 321). The first
year's work had ended in catastrophe, and was regarded, or appeared
to be regarded by my comrades and by the world at large, as a fail-
ure. I have already quoted one paragraph from a letter from Profes-
sor Hilprecht regarding the paucity of the first year's results. In the
same letter he says that everywhere among scholars he hears the report
that the first year's expedition was a failure; and expresses his regret
that I am to resume excavations at Nippur, which he had hoped would
be abandoned in favor of another site, preferably Mughair (Ur).
Every member of my staff had resigned, a large sum of money had
been spent in excavating at Nippur3 with no tangible results, and the
gentlemen of Philadelphia were naturally dissatisfied. I was recalled
for consultation with the committee, and the first question asked me
by the treasurer was, how much it would cost to settle the whole mat-
ter and end the expedition. Furthermore, it was very uncertain
whether the Turkish government would allow us to return to Nippur
at all. With this uncertainty and the difficulty of securing funds,
resulting from our failure to produce results, it was natural that the
committee should be unwilling to send a large staff into the field,
which might spend months at Aleppo or some other place, waiting for
permission to proceed, as we had done in the first campaign. It was
not my desire to conduct the excavations alone, but the necessities of
the situation, which made the committee conclude that it was undesir-
able to provide me with a staff. It was even against the written rec-
ommendation of the committee that I engaged Haynes for the second
year in order to secure at least the advantage of photography. I had
originally become the director of the expedition, because in that way
only did it seem possible to secure the funds for the work which I
wished to see prosecuted in the excavation of old Babylonian sites.
I had originally gone out for one year only, but before the first year
was up the committee had advised me that it was absolutely necessary
3 Hilprecht's statement of the amount expended (p. 318) is, however, some $6,000
in excess of the actual amount, as can be seen by a reference to my Nippur, Vol. I,
p. 296.
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)151.100.200.66 on Sat, 30 Dec 2023 10:40:41 +00:00(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
718 THE AMERICAN JOURNAL OF THEOLOGY
that I should continue in the field a second year; that otherwise the
work would fail, as support could not be secured. After the failure of
the first expedition I felt a personal responsibility to repay the faith
and the expenditures of the committee, as it were, by turning failure
into success. I felt keenly during the second campaign the lack of
an expert architect or engineer, and it was that which led me to avail
myself of the opportunity, to which Hilprecht refers (p. 344), to secure
for a time the services of a Hungarian engineer, formerly in the
employ of the Ottoman government.
In a note on p. 339 Hilprecht denies my statement that the com-
mittee in Philadelphia made a constant demand for objects. My
account of my work in Nippur will show anyone who reads that book
that Hilprecht's representation that my only thought was to search
here, there, and everywhere for tablets is a misrepresentation. The
bulk of my workmen were concentrated on the exploration of the
temple construction, which certainly was not a search for tablets.
Another considerable body were occupied during a great part of the
time in the excavation of the next most interesting building found in
the mounds, the Parthian palace on the west side of the canal. Gangs
of selected workmen, as I have stated in my Nzippur, were employed
by me in search for tablets, though not quite in the method described
by Dr. Hilprecht. I was, of course, very much interested in the dis-
covery of tablets, both for themselves--for inscribed tablets are, after
all, the most valuable discoveries made in Assyria and Babylonia-
but also, and even more particularly, because the whole future work
of excavation in Babylonia seemed to depend on my success in find-
ing and obtaining for the museum in Philadelphia large quantities of
inscribed material. Here is a quotation from a characteristic letter of
the chairman of the committee, under date of February io, 189o :
All depends upon this year's work. You must make large finds, and
Hamdy Bey must make a liberal division of them, so that we can have
important collections in hand before summer.
My hope was to make such a success of the second campaign as to
place the enterprise of excavating Nippur on a secure foundation, so
that I should have successors who could excavate completely all, at
least, that was important in the mounds of Nippur. In the work on
the temple, and, indeed, in general in the work of excavation, I was a
pioneer. Our trenches in the first year were entirely tentative, and a
large part of my work in the second year was of the same character.
I was endeavoring to find where the remains were which should be
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)151.100.200.66 on Sat, 30 Dec 2023 10:40:41 +00:00(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
THE EXCA VA TION OF NIPPUR 719
excavated, and above all to discover if there were important ancient
remains underneath the late structures and the huge mass of late
d6bris on the temple mound. It should be remembered also that it
was very uncertain whether the work would be continued at all. I
had, therefore, not only to prepare the work for the excavations which
were to follow, but also so to excavate that, if the work were aban-
doned, we should, if possible, know something of an old Babylonian
temple. I am not claiming that I did not make very serious mistakes.
It would have been strange if a much wiser man than I should not
have done so under the same circumstances. It would be strange,
also, if, considering the character of the remains of the temple, unlike
anything previously explored, as Hilprecht points out, and composed
of unbaked brick, I did not destroy some things and fail to under-
stand much more. I can, however, claim that I succeeded in discov-
ering where the most important remains were to be found, and put my
successors in the way of excavating them scientifically. For the proof
of this I must refer my readers once more to my Nipur.
Hilprecht seems often to go out of his way to criticise my work,
sometimes with rather ludicrous results. So, for instance, he blames
me (p. 332) for my "endeavor to reach the older remains before the
more recent strata had been investigated" by means of a diagonal
trench cut through the center of the ziggurrat.4 Now, it chances that
this particular trench was a part of that "systematic exploration of
Bint el-Amir . . . . undertaken in accordance with a plan prepared
by the Assyriologists and the architect" (p. 308) in the first year ; so
that according to his own showing Professor Hilprecht was in this
matter particeps criminis. The same is true of a tunnel beneath the
large court of the Parthian palace on the west side of the canal, which
he criticises in a similar manner (pp. 567 f.).
Having made a success of the second expedition, to the extent
that I had proved that work could be conducted at Nippur and that
the results to be obtained were very great, I felt that my part had
been accomplished. I was urged to continue for a third year, but
could not arrange to do so. The difficulty was to find someone to
take up the work. I recommended Haynes, my lieutenant in the
second expedition, for that purpose, and if it had been possible to
4 It should be said, by the way, that no later excavations would have been con-
ducted at Nippur unless, by means of wells and shafts, I had first ascertained that
underneath the immense accumulation of late material in the recent strata there lay
,lder remains worth examining.
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)151.100.200.66 on Sat, 30 Dec 2023 10:40:41 +00:00(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
720 THE AMERICAN JOURNAL OF THEOLOGY
transport the objects found to Constantinople and secure a liberal
portion of those objects within any reasonable time, the expedition
would have been continued without interruption. Haynes did in fact
remain at Baghdad for some time waiting for instructions from the
committee. But the committee was unwilling to go on, and indeed
felt itself unable to raise the money to do so, until it had some tangible
results to show to the contributors. I left Nippur in May, 189o, but
it was not until the close of the year 1891 that the objects assigned to
us began to reach Philadelphia. The result of this long delay was
that enthusiasm had cooled, and the expedition under the first iradi
was allowed to come to a close.
Then followed what was to me a very discouraging period. It was
proposed to abandon the work at Nippur, which, from my point of
view, had only just begun, and to confine ourselves to the study and
publication of the material discovered. Money was needed for
museum purposes, to send Hilprecht to Constantinople to study the
objects retained there and to publish the material in proper form, and
for a time it seemed as though no money could be obtained for the
work in the field. It was not because I, or presumably the committee,
felt that the best method of excavation was to have only one man in
the field that Haynes was sent out alone in I892. I believed then, as
I believe now, that if we did not continue the work at Nippur at once,
the greater part of what we had accomplished would be lost, not merely
nor chiefly through illicit digging by the Arabs and the consequent
destruction of the ruins, but by the loss of interest at home, which
would have resulted in the complete abandonment of the enterprise.
Haynes was the only available man to send. He was not the ideal
man, but he had had a long experience in work, and no one else could
be secured; for both at this time and later the greatest difficulty was
found in obtaining anyone to send to conduct excavations at Nippur.
With much misgiving, but believing it to be a necessity of the work,
Haynes was sent out alone to do what no one had done before - to
conduct excavations continuously, winter and summer. A peculiar
responsibility was also laid upon me for the success of Haynes's work,
which was undertaken largely at my urgency.
Hilprecht represents Haynes's work as having been a mere search
for tablets, and holds partly Haynes and partly me responsible for
this. The instructions which I drew up for Haynes, as reported in
very brief form in Vol. II, pp. 371 f., of my Nippur, should show, I
think, what was my attitude with regard to the excavations. Hilprecht
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)151.100.200.66 on Sat, 30 Dec 2023 10:40:41 +00:00(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
THE EXCA VA TION OF NIPP UR 721
states (p. 353) that Haynes abandoned the work on the temple mound
"and undertook to unearth a sufficient quantity of tablets to meet
Peters's growing demands for inscribed material." This demand
came not from me, but from the committee. Under date of Septem-
ber 2, 1894, I received a letter from the chairman of the committee
which contains this statement:
The work done by Haynes, during the past few months, in excavating
the ancient temple, is very interesting; but I would like to have some
portable finds.
He goes on to add that he will write him to send a force of men
to excavate for tablets. Haynes had written on June 30, asking per-
mission to work for not exceeding two months on the temple, and that
time was up. Hilprecht quotes (p. 370) from one of Haynes's reports
about this time:
I should like to see systematic excavations undertaken on this temple
enclosure, not to be excavated section by section, but carried down as a
whole, to distinguish the different epochs of its history, each well-defined
level to be thoroughly explored, sketched, photographed, and described,
before the excavation of any part should be carried to a lower level. This
method would be most satisfactory and less likely to lead to confusion of
strata and levels.
To which Hilprecht adds:
We naturally ask in amazement: Though knowing the better method,
why did he never adopt it at a time when he was in complete charge of
the expedition in the field, and the committee at home ready to support him
with all the necessary technical assistance?
The above letter, and others of a similar tenor, will explain at least
the reason why he left the temple to search for tablets, and will show
the attitude of the committee, of which Hilprecht was a member, at
that time.
Haynes achieved most remarkable success in his search for tablets,
and if the explorations of the University of Pennsylvania at Nippur are
now established on a secure and scientific basis, it must be said that
this is largely, if not chiefly, due to his success in that regard. At
that time also Hilprecht appears to have regarded his work as scientific.
So he writes at the close of Haynes's excavations in I896s that his
work "is equal to that of Layard and Victor Place in Assyria and
something without parallel in previous expeditions to Babylonia."
Hilprecht was at that time aware -or should have been aware, for he
had access to such reports as existed -of the nature of Haynes's work.
s Babylonian Expedition of the University of Pennsylvania, Vol. I, Part II, p. 9.
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)151.100.200.66 on Sat, 30 Dec 2023 10:40:41 +00:00(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
722 THE AMERICAN JOURNAL OF THEOLOGY
Haynes's position during that long and lonely period of this first
expedition was an extremely trying one, physically, mentally, and mor-
ally. As Hilprecht has stated, he failed to make intelligible reports,
or to keep records, so that it was impossible to determine what work he
had done, what had been excavated, where the objects found had been
discovered, etc. The strain and the climate had told upon him
severely, he became morbid and suspicious, and when at last Duncan
and Geere were sent out to Nippur he drove them away. These things,
hitherto unpublished, Hilprecht has thought fit to reveal. But the rev-
elation makes his own course in urging Haynes on the committee as
director of the fourth expedition, and commending his methods as
equal to those of Layard and Place, the more inexplicable. It was
entirely through Hilprecht's urgency, against my earnest protest, that
Haynes was sent out the second time (1899-19oo). I resigned from
the committee, and my knowledge of the results of the last expedition
is, therefore, derived entirely, or almost entirely, from the statements
contained in Professor Hilprecht's present volume. Hilprecht says
that Haynes was more successful than ever in finding tablets, but that
he kept no records, made no intelligible reports, and prevented the archi-
tects who had been sent with him from doing anything, so that it finally
became necessary to send someone out to supersede him and bring order
out of the chaos. The person sent was Dr. Hilprecht, who occupied
the position of "scientific director" of this last expedition, and who
spent a little more than two months, from March i to May 4, on this,
his second visit to Nippur. I do not wish to minimize the excellent
work which Dr. Hilprecht has done, but it does not seem fair that he
should throw on Haynes's shoulders the burden of all failure and claim
all success for himself.
So much for the narrative; and now for the statement of results
achieved; and first some criticisms of comparatively minor details.
The terra-cotta cones, to which Hilprecht refers on pp. 311, 312 as
found in the first campaign along the base of the northwest wall of the
ziggurrat, were in reality found along the base of an outer wall of brick
at what appeared to be the extreme northern corner of the whole temple
inclosure. This wall belonged to a series of brick buildings which
were only partially excavated in the first and second years, and which
do not seem to have been touched in the later campaigns of Haynes
and Hilprecht. The place of discovery of these cones may be a matter
of importance in determining the date and purpose of these structures.
The place of finding the marble tablets containing a list of garments
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)151.100.200.66 on Sat, 30 Dec 2023 10:40:41 +00:00(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
THE EXCA VA TION OF NIPP UR 723
presented to the temple, mentioned on p. 312, was, apparently, not the
temple, as Hilprecht states,6 but an outlying mound some distance
to the south of the temple. The place was not determined with abso-
lute certainty, inasmuch as this tablet was among the objects recovered
from tablet thieves. The objects found by me in my second campaign
in the great trench to the southeast of the ziggurrat and the levels of
those objects are incorrectly stated by Hilprecht (p. 333; see NVippur,
Vol. II, p. I59).
The results of the later explorations, as interpreted by Dr. Hilprecht
in this volume, reverse, in not a few particulars, theories put forth by
me in Nzppur, or by him in the volumes of The Babylonian Expedition of
the University of Pennsylvania. Some of these reversals are, I think,
clearly proved. Of others I am not so certain. Among the most
interesting "finds" of my second campaign was the so-called " jewel-
er's shop," in a low line of mounds to the southeast of the temple
inclosure. As all the objects found in this shop belonged to the later
Cassite kings, I supposed that the buildings in which they were found
were of that period also. Hilprecht now holds that these objects were
part of the stock of a jeweler of the Parthian period, a man who gath-
ered old fragments and converted them into beads and the like, and
that, accordingly, the buildings in which these objects were found were
Parthian and belonged to the last reconstruction of the buildings on
the temple ruins. One or two similar collections he reports to have
been found in the last expedition to Nippur and in the German expe-
dition to Babylonia. His conclusion may be correct, but it should be
observed that the collection found by me differs from the similar col-
lections reported by him as found elsewhere (p. 335) in that, while
those collections consisted of material from different ancient periods,
the material found in my collection was all from one period, the later
Cassite. Moreover, there were here blocks of crude material, lapis
lazuli, magnesite, malachite, etc., which were entirely unworked, side
by side with completed and half-completed objects made from the
same material. One object was evidently in process of manufacture as
a tablet with a Cassite inscription. It was a rough block of lapis lazuli,
one side of which had been smoothed and polished. On this side an
inscription had been incised, after which the manufacturer had begun
to saw off the inscribed face as a tablet. It is noticeable that the box
in which this collection had been inclosed was fastened with copper,
not iron, nails, which again would seem more appropriate to the Cassite
than to the Parthian period.
6 He had correctly located this tablet in a former work.
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)151.100.200.66 on Sat, 30 Dec 2023 10:40:41 +00:00(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
724 THE AMERICAN JOURNAL OF THEOLOGY
The building about the court of columns on the west side of the
canal, to which I devoted a chapter7 and which, with much uncertainty,
I ascribed to the Cassite period, appears to have been fully or more
fully explored under Professor Hilprecht's directions in the last expe-
dition,8 and we have a ground plan of the entire structure on p. 567.
Hilprecht seems to have determined satisfactorily, by coins found in a
brick, that this building, which was only partially excavated by me,9
was Parthian and not Cassite.'o On examining the plan and accom-
panying description in Hilprecht's volume, I find myself somewhat
embarrassed by the fact that there is nothing to show certainly whether
the whole building was excavated and the walls found as given on the
ground plan, or whether some parts of the plan are a speculative
restoration. I found a deep gully covering a portion of the space
occupied by this building on the northeast and southeast. Water had
washed away the earth to a depth far below the foundations of the
building. I should like, also, to know the grounds on which the very
large round column before the court"" is identified as an altar. In the
room marked i6 on Hilprecht's plan, which is described thus:
a kind of anteroom formed a connecting link between the men's quarters,
the servants' rooms, and the section reserved for the women,
I found a large store of burned barley. The whole room was full of
it. The conditions of excavation and the exact facts with regard to
the discoveries made in this interesting little building will doubtless
be given in some future volume, with statements sufficiently detailed to
enable us to check the plan presented, which it is impossibe to do with
the material contained in the present volume.
On p. 559 Hilprecht gives a plan of a Parthian fortress, which
shows, so far as the actual excavation of the Parthian remains on the
top of the temple mound are concerned, little advance on the work
done by me in the second year, and shown on the plan of excavations
facing p. 142 in Vol. II, of my Nibpur. In fact, this is substantially
my plan differently shaded. My plan also shows the excavations and
the remains of constructions at lower levels, while Hilprecht's repre-
sents only the buildings at the highest level. In this case also he
7 Vol. II, chap. 6. 8 Cf. pp. 336 f., 563 ff.
9See my plan, Nippur, Vol. II, p. 178.
,o His statement, by the way, of the grounds of my suggestion that the building
was of the Cassite period, cannot fairly be said to represent the argument used by me,
which can be found in the chapter referred to.
" No. 5, on Hilprecht's plan.
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)151.100.200.66 on Sat, 30 Dec 2023 10:40:41 +00:00(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
THE EXCA VA TION OF NIPPUR 725
seems to have found satisfactory evidence of the date and purpose of
the structure, which I did not.'" Hilprecht holds that this building
was in occupancy as a fortress at least as late as the first Christian
century, and adduces as proof a very interesting tomb found under
one of the rooms on the outer wall of the fortress (p. 507), in which
was a gold coin of the Emperor Tiberius. In general a tomb found
among the remains of any construction is not an evidence that that
construction was in use, but that it was in ruins, at that period. Two
other brick tombs of a somewhat similar description were found by
me among the ruins of the buildings of this latest reconstruction.
My excavations and those of Haynes had shown that there had
been a destruction of temple property, and apparently of temple
buildings, at a certain period, which period seemed to me to coincide
with the period of the supremacy of Babylon. Furthermore, I found
no evidence, in the way of inscribed bricks and the like, of the recon-
struction of the temple by the kings of Babylon. In view of the
rivalry existing between Be1-Enlil of Nippur and B8l-Marduk of
Babylon, I therefore reached the conclusion that the destruction of
these objects was due to the Babylonians.'3 Hilprecht, in his Babylo-
nian Expedition of the University of Pennsylvania, attributes it to the
Elamites about 2285 B. C. Later discoveries have shown that one
Babylonian monarch at least did labor in the reconstruction of the
temple of B61 and has left inscribed bricks, and Hammurabi's code of
laws, recently found by the French expedition at Susa, states distinctly
that Hammurabi restored the temple. It would seem, therefore, that
I was wrong, although it appears to be true that the temple of Bl1 at
Nippur was in general neglected during the period of the Hammurabi
and Pashe dynasties of Babylon, and also during the time of Nebuchad-
rezzar and his successors. A fuller examination of the strata in which
the broken objects were found seems to show that they were destroyed
long before the period of the Elamite conquest of the country, nearer
2600 than 2285 B. C. Hilprecht, therefore, suggests (pp. 378, 379)
that there must have been an Elamite invasion and sack of Nippur
at that period, of which we have as yet no other record.
Hilprecht, as was to be expected, holds to the early date of Sargon
of Akkad, 3800 B. C. He has found, in a pavement intervening
between the pavements of Ur-Gur and Naram-Sin, inscribed bricks
2 His representation of my view is not a fair presentation of the opinion actually
held by me (Cf. Nifppur, Vol. II, p. 262).
-3 Cf. Nippur, Vol. II, chap. Io.
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)151.100.200.66 on Sat, 30 Dec 2023 10:40:41 +00:00(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
726 THE AMERICAN JOURNAL OF THEOLOGY
with the short legend "Lugal-surzu, patesi of Nippur, priest of Bel"
(p. 476). But with this exception the period between those monarchs
is still a complete blank, and, according to Hilprecht's account, there is
in general no, or at best very little, intervening material between
their constructions. The evidence at hand, so far as Hilprecht's
account of the excavations at Nippur is concerned, seems to me to
favor rather the date of 2800 B. C. than the earlier date advocated by
him.
Hilprecht promises us shortly
a special work entitled "Ekur, the Temple of Bel at Nippur," which will
be fully illustrated and accompanied by large plans and diagrams prepared
by the architects of the expedition according to my reconstructions and their
own survey of the actual remains still existing (p. 450).
Until that book appears it is impossible to criticise intelligently
his restoration of the temple. He seems to have shown that the temple
consisted of two courts (plan on p. 470), in the inner of which stood
the ziggurrat and " the House of Bel,"'4 while in the outer were the
small shrine of Bur-Sin, and, probably, a number of other similar
shrines. Two gates of the inner court have been discovered, but the
dimensions of neither court are yet ascertained. I sought for a temple
gate at precisely the point at which Hilprecht locates the gate of the
outer court of the temple in the text (his location of it in the plan is
different), but, although I conducted excavations at this point to a
very low level, I could find nothing. The point at which the gate is
located in the plan corresponds, not with the apparent gate-like open-
ing in the outer line of mounds, as Hilprecht says in the text, but with
a curious tower-like construction in those mounds. Just without the
shrine of Bur-Sin there is a mote-like depression running the whole
length of the temple, and descending much below the level at which
that shrine stands, which would seem to indicate that the outer limit
of that court was not where Hilprecht places it. From his own
account of the excavations and from my own experience, it seems to
me that the dimensions of the inner court must have been, at least on
the southwest side, different from those suggested in his plan; that
there must have been more space and probably also buildings between
the ziggurrat and the wall on that side. It may be that there is evi-
dence, passed over in the description in the present volume, which will
r4By the way, his method of exploring the latter building was precisely the same
as my method of exploring the "Parthian palace," so severely condemned in this
volume.
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)151.100.200.66 on Sat, 30 Dec 2023 10:40:41 +00:00(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
THE EXCA VA TION OF IVIPP UR 727
justify placing the southwest wall so close to the ziggurrat. There are
other points of which no notice is taken, like the great brick construc-
tions at the north corner of the temple inclosure; and, indeed, it is
evident, from Hilprecht's own account, that much work yet remains to
be done before the temple can be reconstructed with any degree of
certainty for any period of its history.
Hilprecht has discovered within the core of the ziggurrat of Ur-Gur,
the earliest which I discovered, a ziggurrat of the time of the Sar-
gonids, thus reversing his former view that ziggurrats began with
Ur-Gur. He believes himself to have found, also, evidence of a pre-
Sargonic ziggurrat (pp. 452 f.), which was "smaller than that of Naram-
Sin and lay entirely within and largely below it." As he points out,
from the fact that the names of the ziggurrat and of the temple itself
are Sumerian, we might expect to find the temple in existence in the
pre-Sargonic period with a ziggurrat, and it may be safe to conclude
that temple and ziggurrat both existed at that time, but it is not clear,
from Hilprecht's account, that he has actually discovered a pre-
Sargonic ziggurrat in his excavations.
It seems that with the Sargonic period came a great change in the
character of the temple, corresponding with a change in civilization
and race. All the important structures yet discovered lie above the
Naram-Sin pavement. Below that there is nothing but remains con-
nected with the burning of the dead. And here we note a most strik-
ing change of custom, for the bodies of the dead, after the time of
Sargon, were disposed of by burial, not by burning.'5 It is worth
while, by the way, to compare with this result the somewhat similar
result obtained by Macalister in the excavation of Gezer. He found
at the lowest levels a pre-Semitic population of an extremely simple
civilization disposing of their dead by burning. These were succeeded,
somewhere, according to his estimate, between 3000 and 2000 B. C.,
by a Semitic population which practised burial instead of burning.
The pre-Semitic population at Nippur, however, would seem to have
been by no means so primitive and barbarous as the pre-Semitic popu-
lation whose remains were discovered by Macalister at Gezer. The
latter were troglodytes and made use of stone implements, and their
pottery was of the rudest. In the pre-Sargonic remains at Nippur, on
the other hand, were found fragments of lacquered pottery, black and
red, more ornamental, according to Haynes's account, than the pottery
1s Although, according to Hilprecht's account, the evidence for this at Nippur is
negative rather than positive.
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)151.100.200.66 on Sat, 30 Dec 2023 10:40:41 +00:00(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
728 THE AMERICAN JOURNAL OF THEOLOGY
belonging to the later Semitic period (p. 406); as builders they had
advanced so far as to understand the principle of the true arch, and
during part of the period at least they practiced the art of writing.
The results of the discoveries in the pre-Sargonic period, as pre-
sented in this volume, are certainly most perplexing. Below the Sar-
gon level, for a depth of thirty feet, there is nothing but remains of
incinerations. The bodies of the dead were burned here and the
ashes generally placed in jars, together with vessels containing food
for the spirits of the dead. For men of greater importance, tomb
chambers were built similar to those found by the German expedition
at Zerghul and Hibba. There were wells, conduits, and drainage
pipes to furnish water for the dead and drain the tombs and graves.
What was supposed by Haynes to be an altar, Hilprecht now supposes
to have been a sort of common pyre for the burning of the dead (pp.
395 and 453), but his arguments for this use are by no means con-
clusive. He suggests (pp. 459 f.) that the ziggurrat itself was origi-
nally of the nature of a tomb, as well as of a house for the gods, and
that the burning of the dead was in a peculiar way connected with the
sanctuary. It should be observed, however, that the excavations con-
ducted on the west side of the canal to the same low level show pre-
cisely the same conditions (pp. 403 f., 419, 533). Below the level of
Sargon nothing appears but the remains of incinerations, and those
extend to a great depth below the level of the plain. The cremation
of the dead would seem, therefore, to have been in no exclusive way
connected with the temple. Another perplexing feature of these pre-
Sargonic discoveries is the level at which they are found. The desert
level at the present time is from six to eight feet below the Sargon
level. The original plain level Hilprecht assumes to have been from
ten and a quarter to eleven feet below the Sargon level. Virgin soil
was thirty feet below the Sargon level and water thirty-five. The pre-
Sargonic remains descend to virgin soil, that is, to a depth of thirty
feet below the Sargon level, and almost twenty feet below what was
then the level of the plain (pp. 391, 402). According to the results
of Haynes's excavations in the canal bed (pp. 420 f.), the city level at
that date would have been ten feet below the bottom of the canal bed.
Altogether these results are quite inexplicable, and we must wait for
further excavations to understand their meaning or even to be sure of
the actual facts. Hilprecht, without giving his grounds, declares that
the burials ascribed by me to the Babylonian period are in fact Par-
thian. There are, according to him, no Semitic burials at Nippur.
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)151.100.200.66 on Sat, 30 Dec 2023 10:40:41 +00:00(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
THE EXCA VA TION OF NIPPUR 729
We pass from the burnings of the pre-Sargonic period to the inter-
ments of the Parthian period, with nothing between. This sounds
incredible.
One of the interesting discoveries made by Professor Hilprecht,
not through excavation, but by interpretation of inscriptions, is the
identification of the canal which divides Nippur into two parts, the
great Shatt-en-Nil, which leaves the Euphrates at Babylon and joins it
again in the neighborhood of Erech, with the river Chebar, by which
the Jewish exiles were settled (p. 411 ); and he also suggests that Tel-
Abib (or Tel Abub ?) was at or in the neighborhood of the sand hills
three or four miles to the northeast of Nippur.
Of the situation of the library I have already spoken. Hilprecht
locates the business quarter along the canal on its west side (pp. 413,
414). I have already stated that a large number of business docu-
ments were found to the east of that canal in the southeast or "library "
hill, while considerable numbers of tablets belonging to the temple
were found at various points on the west of the canal, together with
some literary documents. I do not think that, from the excavations
so far conducted, it is possible to determine with any degree of cer-
tainty the topography of the city. The greater part of the west side
of the canal is quite unexplored, and the same is true of the east side
of the canal, outside of the temple mound, "Tablet Hill," and a part
of the outer wall. It is to be hoped that the work of excavating
Nippur will be carried forward to a real conclusion. Only a small part
of its vast mounds has yet been examined, and no one part has been
completely excavated. The results in our hands up to the present
moment are, therefore, most fragmentary.
In the end, doubtless, the inscribed objects found will prove to be
of the greatest value and of the greatest interest. Hilprecht, in his
notice of objects found in the "library," has given a most fascinating
picture of what the full decipherment of those tablets must yield in
the educational line alone : school exercises, multiplication tables, and
the like; the evidences of careful mental and manual discipline, the
processes of education in the third millenium B. C.; a school of art;
even an interest in archaeology, represented by a little collection of
valuable antiquities, including the fragments of a " ground plan of the
environments of Nippur" (p. 548), which we hope may be more fully
explained in a later work. But Hilprecht also points out that the
texts so far found in the library are mathematical, astronomical, astro-
logical, linguistic, grammatical, and, to some extent, religious, and
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)151.100.200.66 on Sat, 30 Dec 2023 10:40:41 +00:00(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
730 THE AMERICAN JOURNAL OF THEOLOGY
that the texts from Nippur, copied by the scribes of Ashurbanipal for
his library, included just these categories, excluding the religious one.
The question arises, therefore: Will the library finds at Nippur give
us only material of these classes, or may we also expect literary
material, such as the epic of Gilgamesh, including the flood legend,
creation legends, etc.?
It is deeply to be regretted that the policy hitherto pursued has
prevented a more speedy publication of the contents of inscribed tab-
lets. Practically all these collections have been retained exclusively
in the hands of Professor Hilprecht and his pupils. The result of
such a course must be a long delay before the contents of the " library"
and the other collections of tablets can be properly communicated to
the world, the more so as only a portion of Professor Hilprecht's
time, apparently, is to be henceforth devoted to the copying and
decipherment of this material. It is to be hoped that the University
of Pennsylvania will invite the co-operation of Assyriologists in the
study and interpretation of the precious documents from Nippur.
JOHN P. PETERS.
ST. MICHAEL'S CHURCH,
New York City.
WHERE MAY CHRISTIAN CERTAINTY BE FOUND?
THE first of these two works,' whose author has since been called
from Erlangen to succeed Luthardt in the chair of dogmatics at
Leipzig, is a thoroughgoing treatment of its subject, the principal
defect of which is a somewhat unnecessary prolixity of discussion. A
pupil of Frank, and in general occupying the same dogmatic and con-
fessional position, Professor Ihmels was early led to question whether
in Frank's treatment of " Christian Certainty," the Scriptures received
their due, and whether certainty as to the new birth should be made
the central certainty of the Christian, as was done by Frank. The
present work attempts to answer these queries.
One hundred and sixty-seven pages are devoted to "an historical
orientation," in which Luther, the old-Lutheran dogmatics, the period
from Pietism to Supranaturalism, Frank, and Herrmann are succes-
sively reviewed. The remaining portion is devoted to a connected
SDie christliche Wahrheitsgewissheit, ihr letzter Grund und ikre Entstekung. Von
L. IHMELS. Leipzig: Deichert, 19o0. vi+344 pages. M. 5.60.
Neue Grundlegung der Lehre von der christlichen Gewissheit. Von ALEXIS
SCHWARZE. Gittingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1902. ii+I89 pages. M. 3.80.
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)151.100.200.66 on Sat, 30 Dec 2023 10:40:41 +00:00(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

# FIGURE

# BIBLIOGRAPHY

