# METADATA
author: Peters J.P.
source_id:Peters1905_TheNippurL
title: The Nippur Library
Year: 1905
Source_ID:  Peters1905_TheNippurL
Source_Type:Article in Book:Journal of the American Oriental Society
Source_Role,Step_distance: 2 ,3,4 
Pages: 145 -164
Web:  

# TEXT

The Nippur Library
Author(s): John P. Peters
Source: Journal of the American Oriental Society, 1905, Vol. 26 (1905), pp. 145-164
Published by: American Oriental Society
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/592887
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
https://about.jstor.org/terms
American Oriental Society is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access
to Journal of the American Oriental Society
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)77.39.232.98 on Sun, 31 Dec 2023 08:32:55 +00:00(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
The Xippur librany.-By Dr. JOHN P. PETERS, New York
City.
AT the southeastern extremity of the Nippur mounds lies an
isolated hill of triangular shape, estimated to cover an area of
about thirteen acres. At its highest point, at the northwestern
extremity, this hill rises about forty-five feet above plain level,
having an average height of from twenty to twenty-five feet.
It is on the eastern side of the depression of the Shatt-en-Nil,
which divides the mounds of Nippur into two parts, the same
side on which the temple lies. It is separated from the temple
-the next hill to the north (3) by a depression which seems
to be an arm of the Shatt-en-Nil, and bears locally the same
designation. This hill is designated as V. in my reports and in
my AXifpur (5 on the accompanying plan'), the numbers indi-
cating the order in which excavations were commenced, and
designated IV. in Hilprecht's latest publications, although in
his earlier publications he followed my numbering. It is also
called " Tablet Hill." In this hill we found the greater part
of the tablets discovered in the first campaign (1888-89). These
tablets were found exclusively in the northwestern nose of this
hill, at all depths. The description of a few of the finds will
show the conditions under which they were discovered:
Close to the surface in the second trench which we ran, in
February, 1889, we found sixteen tablets, ranging in date over
a period of not less than 2000 years, from an archaic period,
antedating 2500 B.C., to the time of Cambyses, at the close of
the sixth century B.C. In another place some tablets were
found in a tomb of unbaked brick, by the side of a tub-shaped
Babylonian clay coffin. A little over thirty feet beneath the
surface (thirty-four feet beneath the highest point of the mound)
and a little more than nine feet above the plain level, three
tablets of the Hammurabi period were found in a jar, the only
discovery of tablets in a jar made in that mound in the first
' For the accompanying plan I am indebted to Mr. Clarence S. Fisher,
who accompanied the last expedition as architect.
VOL. XXVI. 10
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)77.39.232.98 on Sun, 31 Dec 2023 08:32:55 +00:00(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
146 J. P. Peters, [1905.
\e~x4\4g\1'1/wt1I i l ilk , 1 9 \\\\l
"C =
A~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~I~ ,
_ ~ ~ ~ ~~ ~ 44~ .. _
Ar~d "'-
-y *4fl
%,wf/gv ~ ~ ~ ,A - -
W : ,,'1 i,, , 4lw k ~
Drawn by Clarence S. Fisher.
PLAN OF NIPPUR TO SHOW ESPECIALLY THE SITE OF THEE " LIBRARY "
ON TABLET HILL.
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)77.39.232.98 on Sun, 31 Dec 2023 08:32:55 +00:00(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
Vol. Xxvi.] The Nippur Library. 147
two campaigns. In a room plastered with tinted stucco, appar-
ently belonging to a house of the better class, were a quantity
of jars containing fish bones, grape seeds, grain and the like,
such as were ordinarily found in connection with burials, and
among these a number of tablets of different periods. In an
excavation around the corner of this northwestern nose, border-
ing on the Shatt-en-Nil canal, we found a number of rather
large, well baked, very light-colored tablets of the Hammurabi
period, looking as though they had just been made and never
used or handled.'
In the second campaign, 1889-90, we excavated a considerable
portion of the face of this hill along the edge of the Shatt-en-
Nil canal. These larger excavations enabled us to identify the
strata and especially the buildings of the Hammurabi period,
which were the most important and best preserved in that part
of the mounds. These buildings had been destroyed by fire.
Their date was determined by the number of tablets of the
Hiammurabi period found in them. This Hammurabi stratum
lay about twenty-two to twenty-eight or nine feet below the
surface of that part of the mound. In general the tablets
excavated on this hill were found lying loose in the earth or
confused among buildings to which they did not belong, along
with burial remains, coffins, jars and the like, so that I con-
cluded that they had been buried by their owners beneath the
floors of the rooms in which those owners lived. Some, how-
ever, as in the case of the buildings of the Hammurabi period
above referred to, seemed to belong in the rooms where they
were found. There were no large deposits of tablets at any
one place. They were found singly or in little nests, not placed
on wooden shelves or lying in numbers on clay shelves or
benches.
Writing in 1897, as a result of my own investigation and the
investigations of Prof. Hilprecht made up to that date, I
reported in Nippur2 that in general the tablets found in the
excavations conducted in that hill "were of the ordinary so-
called contract variety, transactions of barter, sale and the like."
Besides the excavations along the Shatt-en-Nil, on the south-
western face of this hill, trial trenches were also run, in the
1 For further details see Nippur, vol. ii., pp. 197 ff.
2 Vol. ii., p. 202.
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)77.39.232.98 on Sun, 31 Dec 2023 08:32:55 +00:00(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
148 fJ. P. Peters, [1905.
second campaign, at various points all over this hill. One of
these trenches was designed to cut the hill through from one
side to the other, thus giving us a complete section. This
trench, however, was never completed. Almost nothing in the
way of construction was found, and only the trenches at the
northwestern nose and along the edge of the canal in the upper
part of the southwestern face yielded tablets or other objects
in appreciable numbers. In March, 1890, work on this hill was
stopped and no further work was undertaken there until the
winter of 41899-1900, almost ten years later.' At that time the
conditions in the trenches on Temple Hill Were such that it was
necessary temporarily, to abandon work there. The men were
accordingly carried across the arm of the Shatt-en-Nil and set
to work in one of my old trenches toward the northeast corner
of Tablet Hill. No finds of any importance were made until
about the middlQ of January, 1900, and then Haynes began to
discover tablets in large numbers. According to his account
this deposit of tablets was by far the largest discovered at any
place on this hill or any other hill in the Nippur complex of
ruin mounds. Under date of January 16th, he reports "thirty
sound tablets," and "many large fine fragments;" January
17th, "twenty-eight sound tablets" and "very many large
fine fragments ;" January 13th, "thirty-three sound tablets"
and "a multitude of imperfect tablets;" January 19th, "forty-
nine sound tablets" and "many fine fragments of tablets. "'
Mrs. Haynes in her diary records that on January 14th, Sunday,
twenty-three boxes of tablets were packed; on the 21st, twenty-
five boxes; on the 28th, twenty-seven boxes; February 4th,
twenty-six boxes. After this the, number of tablets found was
relatively small, and before the close of February this deposit
of tablets was exhausted, and the men removed to another
mound because no more tablets were forthcoming. The great
bulk of the tablets found during these excavations were found
eighteen to twenty-four feet below the surface of the mound
(at that point) in a series of rooms toward the northeast center
of Tablet Hill, marked Library on the accompanying plan. In
these rooms such a large number of tablets were found together,
I Cf. Hilprecht, Exeavations in Assyria and Babylontia, pp. 511 if.
I Hilprecht, Excavations, pp, 509 f.
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)77.39.232.98 on Sun, 31 Dec 2023 08:32:55 +00:00(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
Vol. xxvi.] The Nippur Library. 149
evidently having originally rested on shelves (they were un-
burned .but a fair 'proportion was whole and there were many
large fragments) that Haynes believed himself to have found a
library, and wrote to Hilprecht, then in quarantine at Bosrah,
suggesting this possibility. Before Dr. Hilprecht's arrival,
March 1st, 1900, all the tablets discovered in this supposed
library had been already boxed, with the exception of about
twenty specimens retained for his examination. After his
arrival a small gang of men was employed on Tablet Hill for a
brief period of time, but practically no more tablets were dis-
covered. Such, I believe, is a correct statement of the excava-
tions conducted in the southeastern triangular mound at Nippur,
which has leaped into fame as the site of the " Temple
Library."
Before the close of March, 1900, Prof. Hilprecht had for-
mally adopted the theory that Haynes had discovered a Temple
Library. He writes: "We have definitely found the Temple
Librarv, and in the very mound which in 1889 I designated as
the most probable place .... . As I looked at the matter
more closely, I was struck with the characteristic absence of
contracts and I could very soon determine that the great mass
(grosse Masse) of this unique find (17,200 tablets) was of a
lexicographical and linguistic character,'and that it contained
astronomical, mathematical and religious texts, (hymns, prayers,
etc.), letters, temple accounts, in large numbers (grosse Menge),
whereby the character of a Temple Library is fixed and
assured.
In 1903 Prof. Hilprecht published his -Explorations in Bible
Lands during the 19th Century, the greater part of which con-
sisted of his contribution, " The Excavations in Assyria and
Babylonia." This portion of the work was republished in 1904
as an official publication of the Department of Archaeology of
the University of Pennsylvania, under the title The Babylo-
nian -Expedition of the University of Pennsylvania, Series -D.,
Researches and Treatises. Part of the same ground was cov-
ered by a lecture entitled -Die Ausgrabungen der Universitdt
1 Litterarisches Centralblatt, 1900, No. 19, 20. Sunday School Times,
May 5, 1900. In his later publications he gives the number of tablets as
23,000 and then as 24,000 from the literary and scientific part of the
library, and 28,000 from the remaining part or parts.
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)77.39.232.98 on Sun, 31 Dec 2023 08:32:55 +00:00(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
150 -T. P. Peters, [1905.
von Pennsylvania im Bel-Tempel zu Nippur, also published in
1903, which, with a few slight changes, appeared in English in
1904 as an official publication of the Department of Archae-
ology of the University of Pennsylvania, volume i., part II. of
The Transactions of the Department of Archaeology, with the
title In the l)eriple of Bel at iVipur; A lecture delivered
bWfore German Court and Untiversity Circles. These four pub-
lications, two longer, and two shorter, are in reality, therefore,
but two publications. In all of them we have substantially the
same description of the Temple Library, its discovery and its
contents, with some slight variations in the figures illustrating
the text.
According to his statements in these publications, on his first
visit to Nippur in 1889 as a member of the first University of
Pennsylvania Expedition to Babylonia, Hilprecht reached the
conclusion, from an examination of the surface of the ground,
that it was " extremely probable that the houses of the priests,
their offices, school and library, must be looked for in the large
triangular southeast mound, separated by a branch of the
Shatt-en-Nil from the temple proper."' From a statement
made a few pages further on, it would seem that he presented
this theory to the director, requesting him to excavate the
southeast mound, without result. About ten days later the
director, failing to obtain satisfactory results and growing
" uneasy as to the tangible results of the expedition . . . . . I
seized this opportunity to submit once more for his considera-
tion my views, given above, concerning the topography of the
northeast half of the ruins, pointing out that in all probability
tablets would be found in that large isolated hill, which I
believed to contain the residences of the priests and the temple
library, and requested him to let me have about twenty men for
a few days to furnish the inscribed material so eagerly sought
after" (p. 309). It is a fact that at the date mentioned by
Prof. Hilprecht, Feb. 11th, excavations were commenced in the
northwestern nose of that mound, but he never submitted to
the director any such theory as he here states, nor were the
excavations commenced at his request or in any way under his
control. No member of the expedition with whom I have been
I Hilprecht, Excavations, p. 307.
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)77.39.232.98 on Sun, 31 Dec 2023 08:32:55 +00:00(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
Vol. Xxvi.] The Nippucr ,ibrary. 151
able to communicate has any recollection of a presentation by
Dr. Hilprecht at that time of any such theory, and if in fact
he had any such idea he kept it very carefully to himself both
then and later.
He regarded the first expedition as a failure and a mistake.
Nothing was found and nothing ever would be found at Nippur.
Writing to me some months after the conclusion of our first
campaign, October, 1889, he says: " The only good things
[discovered by us in the first campaign] are the text of Naram
Sin (three lines) and the astronomical tablet," neither of which,
so far as we know, was found in Tablet Hill. This is in strik-
ing contrast with the declarations regarding the results of the
first expedition contained in the work above referred to (p.
310), where he speaks of the "seemingly inexhaustible mines"
of tablets, "the large mass" of which was "written in old
Babylonian characters not later than the first dynasty of Baby-
lon, about 2000 B.C." In this description he states that three
Ashur-etil-ilani tablets "of unusual historical interest" were
discovered in Tablet Hill in the first year. They were in fact
discovered in quite another part of the Nippur mounds (hill
8 on the plan). This is worthy of note as illustrating how
in his imagination, since 1900, everything has gravitated
towards Tablet Hill and the " Library."
During Haynes' first expedition, 1893-96, I was "scientific
director," in the sense that I prepared and transmitted the
directions under which Dr. Haynes worked, and he reported
directly to me, until 1895. During that period Dr. Hilprecht
at the home end was also reporting to me the results of his
examinations of tablets and other objects found, especially so
far as anything occurred which might guide us in the work in
the field. Some time in 1895 Dr. Hilprecht succeeded me in
the direction of the excavations. Up to that time Dr. Hil-
precht seems to have discovered no literary remains from Tablet
Hill or from any other part of Nippur, and no instructions
were given to Haynes to excavate in Tablet Hill, which accord-
ingly, at the close of the third expedition, remained as I had
left it in March, 1890. Dr. Hilprecht was the " scientific
director " of the excavations in the last campaign, Dr. Haynes,
as before, having the immediate direction of the work in the
field. Dr. Hilprecht asserts in his volume (pages 430, 431)
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)77.39.232.98 on Sun, 31 Dec 2023 08:32:55 +00:00(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
152 J. P. Peters, [1905.
that, having concluded that the hill contained the library, he
directed Haynes to concentrate his efforts principally on this
mound, "which he had not touched at all during the third
campaign," and another mound in which lay the Court of Col-
umns (hill 1 in the plan). As already stated, Haynes did, in
fact, commence to excavate in the southeastern mound toward
the close of 1899, taking the occasion of unfavorable weather
and general conditions in the temple excavations to remove his
men and put them on the nearest convenient point.
At the risk of tediousness I have related these things, because
they have a distinct bearing on the genesis of the temple library
idea. It would seem that the idea of the library had not been
developed before the close of the third expedition, even suppos-
ing it to have been developed between that and the fourth
expedition. I have stated that in a letter to Dr. Hilprecht at
Bosrah, Haynes suggested the .possibility that the great mass of
tablets found by him in January and February, 1900, might be
the Temple Library. Hilprecht says in his narrative (p. 445)
that, after reaching the mound, March 1st, 1900, he " ascer-
tained through a study of representative tablets, an inspection
of the rooms in which they had been discovered, and a brief
continuation of the work in the trenches, that the ' Tablet
Hill' actually represented the site of the temple. library, as I
had maintained for so many years," and that he then suspended
the excavations at that place. He says (pp. 512-513), with
regard to the excavations conducted by Haynes in Tablet Hill,
that "two large sections were excavated in the eastern and
western parts of the mound respectively. Both yielded large
quantities of exclusively ancient tablets at practically the same
low level, and only single tablets or small nests of old-Babylo-
nian and neo-Babylonian documents mixed in the upper strata.
From this general result it became evident that the library
doubtless continued to exist in some form or another at the old
site through the last two thousand years of Babylonian history,
but it also followed that the large mass of tablets was already
covered under rubbish at the close of the third millennium.
The period in which the older library fell into disuse could be
fixed even more accurately ;" and then he proceeds to give his
evidence that "the tablet-filled rooms and corridors" of the
older library "were in ruins before Hiammurabi ascended the
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)77.39.232.98 on Sun, 31 Dec 2023 08:32:55 +00:00(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
Vol. Xxvi.] The Kippur Library. 153
throne of Babylon." The " older library" is, according to
him, that which Haynes discovered at a depth of from twenty
to twenty-four feet below the surface, in the northeastern center
of the mound, and, as he also asserts here, at the same level on
the western side of the mound. A plan of the rooms of the
northeastern portion of this older library is given in the text
(p. 523) with an account of the way in which the books were
deposited and found, how they were preserved frora damp, the
nature of the shelves used, sometimes of wood, sometimes of
clay, etc. This northeast portion of the Temple Library was,
according to Hilprecht (p. 524), " a combined library and
school " as " was determined immediately after an examination
of the contents of the unearthed tablets and fragments" It
was this portion of the library that included the "more scien-
tific works, the tablets for religious edification and books of
reference," as well as "the many mathematical, astronomical,
medical, historical, and linguistic tablets recovered;" besides
" hymns and prayers, omens and incantations, mythological and
astrological texts" (p. 529). The description of the contents
of this "library" is not in all places absolutely clear. There
are passages which refer positively to Haynes' discovery of
what Hilprecht calls the " older library." There are other
passages which might possibly be interpreted as referring to
later strata, but at least all refer to the excavations in Tablet
Hill, and in the northeastern portion of that hill. From this is
carefully differentiated " the business and administrative depart-
ment established in the 'library"' (p. 532), which occupied
"the southwest rooms of the mound" (p. 524), "the school
and the technical library " being " in the rooms nearest to the
temple," that is, " within a comparatively small radius in and
around the central rooms of the northeast portion."
The description contained in -Die Ausgrabungen irni Bel-
Tempeql zu Xippur, and its English translation, In the _YlThple
of Bel at Xippur, are substantially the same.
There are, accompanying the text in these three publications,
in all eight half-tone or photographic reproductions of the
objects found in that part of the library described as the literary,
scientific and school section of the library. These are (1) " an
astronomical tablet from the temple library" (not contained in
the German publication); (2 and 3) multiplication tables, to
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)77.39.232.98 on Sun, 31 Dec 2023 08:32:55 +00:00(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
154 J. P. Peters, [1905.
illustrate the way in which the scholars were taught mathe-
matics in the school section of the library (one of these occurs
only in the German publication, the other in all three publica-
tions); (4) a drawing by a temple scholar (in the German pub-
lication only); (5) a bas-relief, " Beltis leading a worshipper "
(Fxcavationzs in Assyria and Babylonia); (6) clay bas-relief,
"Lutanist surrounded by animals" (in all publications); (7) "a
hexagonal clay prism" (not in The Excavations in -Babylonia
and Assyria); (8) "a round practice tablet" (in the German
publication only). There are also some descriptions and cuts
of copies of tablets which do not profess to be facsimiles.
These are very few in number and not readily identifiable, and
may therefore be omitted.
1. The astronomical tablet, as shown by museum marks and
admitted by Dr. Hilprecht, was not dug up by us in Nippur at
all. It was purchased from an antiquity dealer, Khabaza, in
Baghdad, by Prof. Robert Francis Harper, for the expedition,
in January 1889, eleven years before Haynes made his discovery
or any tablets had been found in that portion of Tablet Hill,
and a month before the mounds of Nippur had-been touched at
all. There is every reason for supposing that this tablet came
from one of the northern ruins, Babylon, Abu Habba or Borsippa.
There is absolutely nothing in the tablet itself to determine its
provenance, the few characters there are being quite illegi-
ble, and the astronomical figure, a seven-rayed star in a circle,
not absolutely identifying the locality, although it might be
supposed to suggest an origin from Abu Habba, ancient Sip-
para.'
2-3. One of the multiplication tables, which appears in all
the publications, was dug up, as the museum mark shows, by
me in the second expedition, in April 1890, that is, a month
after we had abandoned work on Tablet Hill. We were at that
time conducting excavations on the further or western side of
the western mounds, across the Shatt-en-Nil (hill 10) from
Tablet Hill.
The other, which appears only in the German publication, is
shown by the museum mark (it was catalogued in 1899) to have
'An examination of the Khabaza tablets by I)r. Hermann Ranke
shows that most of those the provenance of which can be certainly
determined from the text, came from Abu Habba (Sippara).
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)77.39.232.98 on Sun, 31 Dec 2023 08:32:55 +00:00(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
Vol. xxvi.] The iXippur Library. 155
been purchased by Noorian in 1889. It is part of a collection
with regard to which we have as positive proof as can be
obtained in the case of bought collections, that it came from
Abu Habba, where Scheil, in his excavations, later discovered a
considerable number of multiplication tablets of the same gen-
eral character.
4. The "Drawing of a Temple Scholar" is described in Dr.
Hilprecht's German lecture (p. 59) as one of a series of tablets
in these words: " Zeichnenunterricht wurde ebenfalls erteilt.
Ich kenne eine Reihe von Tafeln, auf denen sich gerade und
schiefe Linien, Zickzacks, Karos, Lattenmuster und ilinliche
Figuren finden. Dann schritt man zum freien Handzeichnen
nach Vorlagen und der Natur, wobei unbegabte Schiller sich
bisweilen ganz Schreckliches leisteten (Abb. 41)."
This passage, without the illustration, appears in the Transac-
tions of the Department of Archaeology, In the Temple of Bel
at lvippur (p. 112), in these words: "Instruction in drawing
was likewise given. We have a whole series of tablets on which
there are straight and oblique lines, zigzags, lattice-work, and
similar forms. Then they advanced to free-hand drawing from
patterns or from nature, with sometimes rather amusing results
on the part of untalented pupils. Some of these drawings may
represent caricatures." Evidently- the same tablet is referred to
again without any illustration in Excavations in Assyria and
Babylonia (p. 527), as follows: "The course in art led grad-
ually up to free-hand drawing from nature, and probably in-
cluded also lessons in clay modelling and in glyptics and sculp-
ture (seal cylinders, bas-reliefs and statues). Several fragments
of unbaked tablets exhibited portions of animals and trees
more or less skilfully incised in clay. One bird was executed
very poorly." In reality, as even a cursory examination of the
cut in the German publication will show, the object is a frag-
ment of an archaic stone vase, and the work is not practice or
school work. The original is said to be in the Museum of Con-
stantinople. The University of Pennsylvania has a photograph
of this object, with a note by Haynes recording the fact that
it is the photograph of a fragment of a stone vase. Further-
more, although dug up at Nippur by the fourth expedition, it
was not found in Tablet Hill, as is plain from the date of its
discovery, before October 1899.
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)77.39.232.98 on Sun, 31 Dec 2023 08:32:55 +00:00(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
156 J. P. Peters, [1905.
5 and 6. Both of these clay bas-reliefs were dug up at Nip-
pur during the fourth expedition; but, like the preceding, both
of them were dug up before work had been begun on Tablet
Hill. They were in the hands of the architect of the expedi-
tion as early as October 1899, before any work had commenced
on Tablet Hill. They could not, therefore, have come from the
temple library at that place. '
7. The hexagonal clay prism was discovered in the third
expedition, conducted by Dr. Haynes, and in this expedition, as
stated above, in Dr. Hilprecht's own words, no excavations
were conducted on Tablet Hill. At what part of the mounds
it was discovered is not clear, but this much is certain: that it
was not found in. the northeast section of the so-called library
nor on Tablet Hill at all.
8. The same is true of the round practice tablet.
In other words, of the eight illustrations which, from the
text, would appear to be illustrations of the "older temple
library" in the northeast section of the hill, that is, that por-
tion of the library which was destroyed before the time of
Hammurabi and the remains of which were discovered some
twenty to twenty-four feet beneath the surface of the ground
by Haynes, not a single one represents an object found in that
group of rooms or even on Tablet Hill, and two did not come
from Nippur at all.
That with which I have so far dealt is the ' literary and scien-
tific library and the school,' according to Prof. Hilprecht's
statements. It is also called by him the " older library " or
the "ancient library,?" that which belonged to the period ante-
dating the Elamite conquest. So, for instance, on page 515 he
says: "As nearly the whole of the excavated material from
the ancient library is literary and scientific in its character, the
tablets, with but few exceptions, are unbaked. They conse-
quently have suffered not only from the hands of the Elamites,
but also from the humidity of the soil to which they were
exposed for more than four thousand years." On page 520 he
says that: "the whole area occupied by the large triangular
1 Two other art objects referred to by Hilprecht in connection with
these bas-reliefs, a hog and a buffalo (Excavations, p. 523), could not
have come from the '* library." as is clear from the date and place of
discovery.
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)77.39.232.98 on Sun, 31 Dec 2023 08:32:55 +00:00(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
Vol. xxvi.] The Nippur Library. 157
mound was included in the temple library and school of the
city. The real Babylonian buildings, as far as excavated, may
naturally be divided into a northeast and a southwest section.
An enormous barrier of unexplored debris, 'pierced only by
one large tunnel and a few branch tunnels,' lies -at present be-
tween the two quarters. The ground plan of the entire com-
plex can therefore not yet be determined. Both wings consist
of a number of chambers, corridors, fragmentary walls, streets,
.etc., found at the same low level as stated above." On page
521 he says that "The excavated part of the southwest wing
of the large complex comprises forty-four rooms and galleries,
more or less connected with each other ; the northeast section
about forty." On page 524 he says "Though literary tablets
in small numbers occurred almost everywhere in the hill, the
large mass of them was found within a comparatively small
radius in and around the central rooms of the northeast portion.
On the other hand, there was not a single business document
unearthed in that general neighborhood, while more than one
thousand dated contracts, account lists, and letters came from
the southwest rooms of the mound. It would therefore seem
natural to conclude that in view of the doubtless large traffic
carried on by boats on the Chebar, the business and administra-
tive department of the temple was established on the bank of
'the great canal,' and the educational department-the school
and the technical library-in the rooms nearest to the temple."
No map of the excavations on this hill is given in his publica-
tions, by which it is possible to locate precisely the position of
these two sections, but this description shows conclusively that
what he means by the southwest section was that part along the
bank of the Shatt-en-Nil canal, which he assumes to be identi-
cal with the canal Chebar of the Book of Ezekiel. He gives
but one specimen of the contents of this "business and admin-
istrative department established in the 'library', where con-
tracts were executed, orders given out, income and expense
lists kept, etc.", namely, the Lushtamar tablet. In The
Ercavations in Assyria and Bahylonia (p. 532), he describes
this tablet as follows: "A number of letters were found in-
tact. The envelopes, sealed and addressed more than four
thousand years. ago, immediately before the city was con-
quered and looted, were still unbroken. While writing these
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)77.39.232.98 on Sun, 31 Dec 2023 08:32:55 +00:00(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
158 JT P. Peters, [1905.
lines one of those ancient epistles of the time of Amraphel
(Gen. 14) lies unopened before me. It is 314 inches long,
214 inches wide, and 1% inches thick. One and the same
seal cylinder had been rolled eleven times over the six sides
of the clay envelope before it was baked with the document
within. It bears the simple address, 'To Lushtamar.'
Though sometimes curious to know the contents of the letter,
I do not care to break the fine envelope and to intrude
upon Mr. Lushtamar's personal affairs and secrets, as long
as the thousands of mutilated literary tablets from the library
require all my attention." In -Die Ausgrabunge)n irn Bel-
Tempel zu lNippcur (p. 62) he gives a cut of the Lushtamar
tablet with the title: "Abb. 47. Brief im adressierten und
gesiegelten Toncouvert (ca. 2300 v. Chr.)." This cut appears
also in The ?emjple of Bel at Xippaur (p. 116, cut 49), entitled
"Letter in Clay Envelope. To Lushtamar." The letter print
accompanying this illustration (p. 114) is as follows: " Of the
numerous letters from the time of the first Babylonian and
Cassite dynasties, taken partly from the library, partly from
the business houses on the west bank of the Chebar, one dating
from about 2300 B.C. may be briefly referred to (figure 49).
It is at present still inside of its original clay envelope, which
is sealed on each of the six sides twice with the same seal, con-
taining name and profession of the sender, and is addressed
on the front side 'to Lushtamar.' A new catastrophe befell
Nippur before the letter could be sent off. Fully occupied at
present by my laborious work on the temple library, I have, in
spite of a very pardonable curiosity, not yet found time to open
the envelope and acquaint myself with the private correspond-
ence of Mr. Lushtamar." According to the museum marks
put on this tablet by Prof. Hilprecht himself, it was purchased
by him in the year 1889, with a sum of money given by Prof.
Prince, and is part of the Prince collection now in the Museum
in Philadelphia. It was, therefore, not dug out in the fourth
expedition, in 1899-1900, and in all human probability ne ver
came from Nippur at all.' It is possible that the letter itself,
1 There seems to be serious question whether this tablet does in fact
belong to the Prince collection. It answers exactly to the description
of a tablet in the Noorian collection, of the existence of which other-
wise I can obtain no information. The Noorian collection came from
Abu Habba, the Prince collection presumably from Babylon.
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)77.39.232.98 on Sun, 31 Dec 2023 08:32:55 +00:00(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
Vol. Xxvi.] The A ippur Library. 159
if it were opeined, would show its provenance. For some reason
Prof. Hilprecht and the authorities of the Philadelphia Museum
have refused to have the envelope opened and the letter exam-
ined. But not only does this tablet not come from excavations
conducted in 1899-1900 in the Tablet Hill at Nippur, it would
appear from such reports as are available that no excavations
were conducted on Tablet Hill along the banks of the Chebar
canal in that campaign ; that that section of the mound has in
fact never been touched since it was abandoned in March, 1890,
the trenches lying to-day as they were left at that date. In
that case any evidence of the existence of this "administrative
and business section of the library " must come from the exca-
vations of the expedition of 1889-1890. As already stated, we
found no considerable deposit of tablets at any place in the
rooms on this part of the hills.
As already stated, the tablets found by us in Tablet Hill in
the first and second expeditions were, in point of fact, tablets
of a business character. They did not, however, constitute a
library or even an archive. Among these tablets Dr. Hilprecht
now asserts (p. 511 of The Excavations in A8ssyria and Baby-
lonia) that there were " several hundred contract tablets and
temple lists written at the time of the Assyrian, Chaldean, and
Persian rulers (about 700-400 B.C.), a few fragments of neo-
Babylonian hymns, letters and syllabaries, a considerable num-
ber of business documents, dated in the reigns of the kings of
the first dynasty of Babylon (about 2300-2100 B.C.), and more
than twenty-five hundred literary fragments of the third pre-
Christian millennium generally half effaced or otherwise dam-
aged." As according to his statement on the same page the
total number of tablets found on that hill during the excava-
tions of 1889-1890 was only about 4,000, it would appear that the
greater portion were of a literary character. This is so contrary
to the reports of Dr. Harper and Dr. Hilprecht with regard to
the tablets found in that hill in the first year and my own recol-
lections of the character of the tablets found there in the
second year, and further so little agrees with Dr. Hilprecht's
present assertion that that part of the hill constituted the busi-
ness and administrative section, that I venture to think the
whole statement is erroneous. We may with confidence dismiss
the " administrative and business section of the library," along
the edge of the Chebar canal on Tablet Hill, as non-existent.
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)77.39.232.98 on Sun, 31 Dec 2023 08:32:55 +00:00(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
160 1. P. Peters, [1905.
Besides the " ancient library" or the " old library," existing
before the Elamite conquest, the remains of which Dr. Hilprecht
supposes to have been found in Haynes' excavations, there were
also, according to him, discoveries made on Tablet Hill which
proved the existence at the same place of a library after the
time of Hammurabi. This he calls the " later library" (p.
516). A considerable number of earlier tablets were "found
in the rooms and rubbish of the upper strata," which formed
part of this "later library," since "after the expulsion of the
Elamites, when normal conditions began to prevail again in
Shumer and Akkad, the priests of Nippur returned to their
former quarters and rebuilt their schools and libraries at the
place previously occupied. In levelling the ground they neces-
sarily came upon many of the texts of the ruined library.
Other earlier tablets, however, must have been added at a much
later period as the result of regular excavations, as is shown by
the following instance." The "following instance " to which
reference is here made is one of the most interesting and fasci-
nating records in Prof. Hilprecht's account of the "library":
"Soon after my arrival at Nuffar in 1900, an important jar in
terra-cotta was unearthed in the upper strata of the south-
western wing of the library. It contained about twenty in-
scribed objects, mostly clay tablets, which constituted a verita-
ble small Babylonian museum, the earliest of its kind known to
us. These antiquities, already more or less fragmentary when
deposited in the jar, are equally remarkable for the long period
which they cover and the great variety of the contents of their
inscriptions. They had apparently been collected by a neo-
Babylonian priest or some other person connected with the
temple library" (p. 516). He goes on to say (pp. 517-518)
that: "the owner, or curator, of the little museum of Babylo-
nian originals must have obtained his specimens by purchase or
through personal excavations carried on in the ruined buildings
of Bel's city. He doubtless lived in the sixth century, about
the time of King Nabonidos, and was a man well versed in the
ancient literature of his nation and deeply interested in the past
history of Nippur." . . . . " Every object contained in this
vase is a choice specimen, and evidently was appreciated as such
by the collector himself, who had spared no pains to secure as
many representative pieces as possible. The first antiquity of
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)77.39.232.98 on Sun, 31 Dec 2023 08:32:55 +00:00(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
Vol. xxvi.] The Xipur Library. 161
my Babylonian colleague which I examined was the fragment of
a large tablet with the plan of houses, canals, roads, gardens,
etc. I could well realize the delight he must have felt in
acquiring this specimen. For even before having cleaned it, I
recognized that it represented a section of the ground plan of
the environments of Nippur,-a subjective view soon after-
wards confirmed by discovering that the ideogram of " the city
of BWl," -En-lil-ki, i. e., Nippur, was written in the middle of
the fragment." This description is accompanied by a half-tone
reproduction of this plan (p. 513) entitled "Large fragment
of a Clay Tablet containing the Plan of Kippur and its Envi-
ronments. "
According to the statements of Mrs. Haynes, who kept a
diary during the last expedition, which is practically the only
record available of the place, method, etc., of the discovery of
objects, this plan-it is a sufficiently striking object to secure
identification-was actually discovered about, or a little more
than five months prior to Dr. Hilprecht's arrival at Nippur. It
was not found in any jar. In fact it was too large to have
been inserted into the ordinary jars in which tablets were dis-
covered. It was not discovered on Tablet Hill, but in another
part of the ruin mounds of Nippur, excavations on Tablet Hill
not having been commenced at that time. This statement is
corroborated by the architect of the expedition, Mr. C. S.
Fisher, who states that shortly after his arrival at Nippur, some-
where in October, 1899, this plan was handed to him by Dr.
Haynes to be cleaned and drawn; that the work was so delicate
that he scarcely dared undertake it, and that it remained for a
considerable time in his possession in his tent. Both these per-
sons, Mrs. Haynes and Mr. Fisher, assert that they saw no such
jar as that to which Dr. Hilprecht refers, and that to the best
of their knowledge and belief no such jar was found at
that time. It is difficult to see how such a jar could have
been discovered without their knowledge. According to their
statements, two jars were actually found. One of these, a
sealed jar, was opened on a Sunday morning, a little after Dr.
Hilprecht's arrival on the grounds, in the presence of the mem-
bers of the expedition, and proved to contain nine tablets and
one small vase. The other jar, apparently referred to on page
512 of Prof. Hilprecht's The Excavations in Assyria and Baby-
VOL. XXVI. 11
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)77.39.232.98 on Sun, 31 Dec 2023 08:32:55 +00:00(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
162 1. P. Peters, [1905.
lonia (" a small jar of baked case tablets dated in the reigns
of members of the first dynasty of Babylon, was unearthed at
a higher level than the body of those ancient ' clay books"'),
was found in the morning of the day on the afternoon of which
Prof. Hilprecht arrived at Nippur, by or in the Shatt-en-Nil.
It lay on its side, and very little earth had silted in. There
were in it seven small baked case tablets. In his notes Dr.
Haynes recounts this discovery, and then adds, apparently after
Dr. Hilprecht had examined the tablets, that the tablets in this
jar were of various dates.
In view of the unreliable statements with regard to this dis-
covery of a jar in the " later library," the fact that no evidence
is given of the discovery in the so-called " later library" any-
where of deposits of tablets on shelves or in rooms in any con-
siderable number, and in view of the fact that in the excava-
tions conducted at various points all over this mound in 1889 and
1890 occasional tablets or small nests of tablets from a period
antedating Hammurabi onward were discovered, but in no case
any considerable deposits or collections of tablets, I think we
may confidently affirm that there is no evidence of the existence
on this hill of a " later library," and that we rather have nega-
tive evidence to the contrary.
I may add that Dr. Hilprecht now affirms that at the Cassite
period the temple library lay on the west side of the Shatt-en-
Nil, at the southern end of the hills on that side. In point of
fact considerable deposits of tablets of the Cassite period were
found during the second, third and fourth expeditions at various
points on the mounds west of the canal, from the neighborhood
of the Court of Columns (hill 1), directly opposite the temple,
southward. The distance from the farthest north of these depos-
its to the farthest south must be at least a quarter of a mile in a
straight line. There were further found on that side of the
canal, at different places, deposits of tablets of other periods, for
instance the Murashu tablets of the Persian period (on hill 1), a
considerable deposit of neo-Babylonian tablets (hill 10), another
deposit of tablets of the time of the Ur dynasty (hill 10), etc.
The relation to one another of the buildings in which these tablets
were found and the nature of these buildings have not been made
clear. The Cassite collection, found by me in the neighbor-
hood of the Court of Columns, consisted of temple archives; the
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)77.39.232.98 on Sun, 31 Dec 2023 08:32:55 +00:00(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
Vol. xxvi.] The Nilpur Library. 163
Murashu tablets, on the other hand, were private documents.
None of these collections in themselves nor all together consti-
tute a library, nor are of the nature of a library, as that term
has been commonly understood, and as it is in fact applied by
Dr. Hilprecht in the publications to which I refer.
Now in conclusion, what was the nature of the tablets dis-
covered by Dr. Haynes in the very large deposit found by him
some twenty to twenty-four feet beneath the surface, in the
northeast corner of the triangular mound at the southeastern end
of the ruins, called Tablet Hill ? Dr. Hilprecht declares that
17,200 or 23,000 or 24,000 (his statement is different in different
publications) tablets were taken out of that " library " and " hur-
riedly examined~ "by him (p. 524). He had, in fact, about twenty
specimen tablets to examine, the rest being boxed up. In all
four or five hundred selected objects, for the most part tablets,
were kept out from the various trenches opened in the expedi-
tion of 1899-1900, packed by themselves and sent out of the
country. These were all or almost all in hand before Dr. Hil-
precht's arrival. The other tablets were packed as they came,
without labels or other marks by which their exact provenance
could be determined. Tablets from quite different parts of the
mound might be packed in the same box, if they were discov-
ered at or about the same time. The condition of Dr. Haynes'
notes with regard to the discovery of tablets is stated by Prof.
Hilprecht on page 500 of his -Excavations. He says: " Conse-
quently our knowledge as to how and precisely where the tab-
lets were found is extremely limited. As I must depend almost
exclusively on Haynes' official entries and records for this im-
portant question, I deem it necessary to submit a specimen of
my only written source of information for the time prior to my
arrival, when most of the tablets were taken out of the ground.
I quote literally from his diary:
' Jan. 16, 1900: 30 sound tablets of promise from a low
level in " Tablet Hill." Many large fine fragments of tablets,
1 pentagonal prism, 7-3/4 inches long; its five sides from 1 to
2-1/6 inches wide. An hour after dark last evening one of our
workmen's huts burned down so quickly that nothing was saved
and the occupants barely escaped with their lives. By vigorous
efforts the neighboring houses were saved."'
Prof. Hilprecht did not cause any of the boxes to be opened.
The tablets were not re-examined and repacked at that time
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)77.39.232.98 on Sun, 31 Dec 2023 08:32:55 +00:00(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
164 Peters, The Nippur Library. [1905.
but left in the boxes without labels, as Dr. Haynes had packed
them. It is stated by Prof. Hilprecht that a considerable part
of the boxes supposed to contain the tablets found by Dr.
Haynes in the temple library came to Philadelphia unopened.
They were deposited in the cellar of the library of the Museum
and it is only within the last few weeks that they have begun
to be opened and examined.
Under these circumstances I think it safe to add to what I
have already said about the " temple library," -that our informa-
tion as to the contents of Dr. Haynes' discovery are so imper-
fect that it is absolutely impossible for anyone, Dr. Hilprecht
included, to make at the present moment an assertion that the
deposit of tablets found by him did or did not constitute a tem-
ple library. We must await their examination. Unfortunately
the method in which this discovery has been handled is such that
it appears to be impossible to rely upon any statement made by
Dr. Hilprecht, unless supported by such manifest and palpable
proof that his statements can be checked and verified by others,
or by the contents of the inscriptions themselves. This is doubt-
less a strong statement to make, but I venture to think that the
evidence which I have presented justifies it, and this evidence
might be fortified by similar evidence from other parts of his
recent publications. 1
I For example, on p. 539 of his Excavations, in his account of his trip
to Fara, he describes the head of a " Markhur goat in copper " figured
on p. 540, as " excavated at Fara," in such a way' as to lead the reader
to suppose that he excavated it, whereas in fact it was bought at Nippur,
before that trip, from natives who claimed to have found it at Abui-
Hatab or FAra. Facing page 538 is a beautiful photograph entitled
" Our First Expedition to the Ruins of AbA Hatab and Fara," which
was really a photograph taken on another occasion. The whole work
is full of similar inaccuracies and misleading representations.
I wish to express my indebtedness to Mrs. J. H. Haynes, who has
placed the field notes from her diary at my disposal; to Mr. Clarence S.
Fisher, who furnished the plan which accompanies this paper; to Dr.
Hermann Ranke, whose notes on the tablets have been of the greatest
service in the preparation of this paper; and to Prof. J. D. Prince, who,
with Dr. Lau, very kindly went to Philadelphia and examined two of
the tablets.
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)77.39.232.98 on Sun, 31 Dec 2023 08:32:55 +00:00(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

# FIGURE

# BIBLIOGRAPHY

