# METADATA
author: Reade J.E.
source_id:Reade2017_TheManufac
title: The Manufacture, Evaluation And Conservation Of Clay Tablets Inscribed In Cuneiform: Traditional Problems And Solutions
Year: 2017
Source_ID:  Reade2017_TheManufac
Source_Type: Article in Book: IRAQ(2017)79163–202
Source_Role,Step_distance: 0,1,2 ,3,4 
Pages: 163-103
Web: Doi:10.1017/irq.2016.10
Published:Cambridge University Press

# TEXT

IRAQ(2017)79163–202Doi:10.1017/irq.2016.10 163
THE MANUFACTURE, EVALUATION AND CONSERVATION OF
CLAY TABLETS INSCRIBED IN CUNEIFORM: TRADITIONAL
PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS
ByJULIANEDGEWORTHREADE
KnowledgeofancientMiddleEasternhistoryislargelybasedonwrittenrecordspreservedonclaytablets,but
tablets have often been separated from other archaeological artefacts, with erratic consequences. This paper
discusses the treatment, distribution and evaluation of tablets since the first major discoveries in 1850, the
problemsandpotentialadvantagesofidentifyingclaysourcesandmethodsofmanufacture,thechallengesof
preserving and recording tablets found in different conditions in the field, and the development of cleaning
and long-term conservation techniques. Early experiments in firing tablets at the British Museum and at
Babylon were followed by the systematic work of Friedrich Rathgen in Berlin around 1900. While his
methods were gradually accepted in principle, there was limited communication among specialists, and
independentproceduresevolved.Thedebateonbestpracticecontinues.
Introduction
From about 3500 or 3000 B.C. until early in ourown era, first and lastly in southern Iraq but once
across the entire Middle East, many records were written in cuneiform scripts (Finkel and Taylor
2015). The signs were cut or impressed on various objects, but especially on round or oblong
tablets made of clay, or “cuneiform tablets”. Over a million tablets or fragments have emerged
from excavations of one kind or another, and are now scattered among collections in Iran, Iraq,
Syria,Turkeyandtherestoftheworld.
Howthesetabletsshouldbeevaluatedandtreated,duringandafterexcavation,haslongbeena
subject of debate. In 2002, during the Nimrud conference at the British Museum, Christopher
Walker stated that I myself had once (actually about 1975) written a paper on the treatment of
tablets in the field, which the then editor of the Journal of Cuneiform Studies had declined to
publishbecause“hedidnotbelievethatAssyriologistscouldbetrustedtocarryouttheprocedures
as advocated without serious risk to the tablets” (Walker 2008: 256). There are at least two
questions here, whether the procedures were desirable and whether the treatment of tablets in the
field should be entrusted to Assyriologists. Walker suggested that I should disinter that paper,
which was entitled “Inscribed tablets as archaeological artefacts”, on the grounds that a record of
my experience of fieldwork in Iraq might be valuable, but I can only locate notes for it, which
probably means that my own copy was lent and never returned. The paper has anyway been
supersededinlargepartbystudiessuchasthoseofJesperEidem(2002)andJonTaylor(2011).
Thepresentpaper,puttogetherinstead,beganasapresentationataBritishMuseumseminaron
thetreatmentofcuneiformtabletsinMarch2015,organisedbyIrvingFinkelandJonTaylor.Because
I had had many opportunities, while employed at the museum during 1975–2000, to speak with
visiting epigraphists, to look through obscure books and documents, and to handle and inspect
hundreds of tablets, especially those in the KCollection, this paper is different from the previous
one, and longer. It discusses some issues relating to tablets that still merit further thought, and it
provides some of the background of which anyone wishing to excavate, clean and/or conserve
tabletsshouldbeaware.
In addition, much has been forgotten or ignored about the modern historyof cuneiform tablets
because, rightly or wrongly, it has not seemed significant. I therefore made a few email enquiries,
and was immediately provided with such a generous range of items of information, not readily
available but again potentially useful to others who may find themselves involved with tablets in
the future, that I have incorporated much of that here too. Accordingly I should like to
acknowledge the help of the following friends and colleagues: Gojko Barjamovic, Bob Biggs,
IraqLXXIX(2017) ©TheBritishInstitutefortheStudyofIraq2017
https://doi.org/10.1017/irq.2016.10 Published online by Cambridge University Press
164 JULIANEDGEWORTHREADE
CarolineCartwright,PaulCollins,IrvingFinkel,GrantFrame,MacGibson,DavidHawkins,Birger
Helgestad, Hermann Hunger, Mogens Trolle Larsen, Maynard Maidman, Paolo Matthiae, Cécile
Michel, Olof Pedersén, Nicholas Postgate, Andreas Schachner, Matt Stolper, Jon Taylor, Aage
Westenholz, Christopher Walker, others such as Douglas Kennedy who taught me about tabletsin
the past, and everyone to whom I listened during the 2015 seminar in London. I am further
indebted to John Mallowan for permission to use his classic photograph, probably taken by
Agatha(Christie)Mallowan,ofanepigraphistatworkonsite,Fig.1.
Tabletsashistoricalsources
Theprincipalacademicvalueofatabletformodernstudentsmanifestlyresidesinthecuneiformtext
on its surface; that is why it has been kept. Europeans had first become interested in cuneiform
inscriptions, either cut on stone above ground at Persepolis or impressed on bricks of fired clay at
or near Baghdad, in the seventeenth century. Later a few burnt tablets emerged from Babylon,
occasionallydescribedatthetimeas“loveletters”;nowtheyarerecognisedasbusiness documents
belonging totheKasrarchive,muchmoreofwhichwasexcavatedafter 1900byRobertKoldewey
(Stolper 2007). Excellent accounts of the kinds of cuneiform document known up to 1850 are
provided by Henry Layard (1849: II, 185–88: 1853: 344–47); then in that year Layard himself
discovered, in orclose to the placewhereit had been abandoned in antiquity, the core of the huge
KCollection of tablets, named after the mound of Kuyunjik (or Kouyunjik) at Nineveh in what is
nownorthernIraq.
AlargecollectionofthemisalreadydepositedintheBritishMuseum.Wecannotoverratetheirvalue.They
furnish us with materials for the complete decipherment of the cuneiform character, for restoring the
languageandhistoryofAssyria,andforinquiringintothecustoms,sciences,and,wemayperhapseven
add,literatureofitspeople.(Layard1853:347)
Thisambitiousclaim,writtenwhenthedeciphermentwasinitsinfancy,hasbeenjustified.Ancient
scribesandothersdecidedwhatinformationshouldberecorded,ontablets,board-booksandother
media; much wasintentionallydiscarded (e.g. Millard2005), and practices changed over time. Yet
those clay tablets that do still survive, from Kuyunjik and elsewhere, constitute our principal
sourceforearlyMiddleEasternhistory.
Thetypesoftabletavailabletohistorianshavealsobeensubjecttorandomfactors:thesitesthat
happen to have been dug, the buildings that happen to have been found, the historical events that
resulted in the survival of cuneiform records, the physical conditions affecting their preservation,
and the circumstances of excavation, dispersal and access to collections. In 1873 the Daily
Telegraph newspaper in London promoted itself by funding an expedition to find a single lost
tablet fragment describing the Biblical Deluge (Smith 1875: 100), and apiece roughly like the one
sought was indeed found; all later British Museum expeditions to Nineveh had the prime purpose
of finding more tablets. That targeted quest was exceptional, however. In the later nineteenth
centuryvastnumbersoftabletswereexcavatedinIraq,buttheworkwasnotmethodicalandgrew
outofchancediscoveriesintheBabylonregionaround1870.
ThepresenceofafewEuropeansatBaghdadandBasrahadlongensuredamodestdemandforthe
ancientobjectsthatwerescatteredonthesurfacealloverthecountry.Whathappenedaround1870is
thatsomeofthepeoplewhowerefollowingthetraditionaltradeofminingNeo-Babylonianruinsfor
fine bricks encountered so many inscribed tablets, notably the Egibi archive, that it became
worthwhile to excavate specifically for them (Reade 1986a: xiv–xvii; Panayotov and Wunsch
2014). A regular market developed. Local merchants such as Yusuf Shemtob sold the tablets not
onlyinBaghdadbutalso,throughagentsandthenindependentdealerssuchasEliasGéjou,inthe
major cities of Europe. The new discoveries attracted purchasers in Biblical and academic circles.
The commercial search for tablets expanded to meet demand, and so did the supply itself; there
were even a few fakes. It became important to keep sources of supply secret. Official French,
British, German, US and Ottoman archaeological expeditions before the First World War found
yetmoretablets.
https://doi.org/10.1017/irq.2016.10 Published online by Cambridge University Press
THEMANUFACTURE,EVALUATIONANDCONSERVATIONOFCLAYTABLETSINSCRIBEDINCUNEIFORM165
Fig.1 CyrilGaddcleaningatabletoutsidetheNimruddig-house,withpotterystoredagainstthewall,1952;
compressedaircomesfromapumpprobablyoperatedbyAbdal-Khalafal-AngudofSherqat.Photograph
probablybyAgatha(Christie)Mallowan.CourtesyJohnMallowanCollection
The results were phenomenal. For instance, at Telloh—“mound of tablets”—in the province of
Basra, Ernest de Sarzec and local people in his absence excavated archives dating from the late
third millennium, and there were more from Drehem near Nippur. Virtually nothing had been
known of this period from previous discoveries in Assyria and the Babylon region. A flavour of
thesituationthatdevelopedisprovidedincorrespondencebetweentheBritishepigraphistsClaude
H.W. Johns and Theophilus G. Pinches. The former played an active role at the beginning of the
twentieth century in identifying incoming tablets for dealers and in acting as middleman. A letter
fromhim,dated24.1.1906(kindlyprovidedbyI.L.FinkelfromthePinchesarchive),states:
IfrequentlyhavetabletssenttomeforsalebyGéjou,heseemstohaveanunlimitedstockofTellohtablets
andverylittleelse.Heseemstowantthreeorfourshillingsapieceforthem,buttheyarenotatallinteresting
asarule.ItisanuntoldpitythatthegreatfindofdeSarzecwasbrokenup.Thereisnohopenowofgetting
togethertheinformationtheyonceafforded.ThousandshavebeenbrokenupforconcreteIamtold.Those
thatreachConstantinopleareperishingfromthedamp,fallingintoearthagain.
With this wealth of material, some institutions and individuals bought tablets almost
indiscriminately, as more or less random lots (e.g. Foster 2013: 128). Among the more fastidious
museum curators was Wallis Budge, who was head of the relevant department of the British
Museum during 1894–1924. He regarded condition and legibility as critical in deciding which
tablets merited a place in the collection (e.g. Reade 1986a: xxvi). He impressed the museum
authorities, and continued to buy with great success. Johns (1911: 5–7) in contrast had the
academic aim of establishing sound ancient chronologies. So he looked for tablets dated in
different years, in order to identify sequences, like successive editions of books or strikings of
coins. These discoveries were not spectacular, and he had difficulty persuading institutions to buy
tabletshewishedtopublish(letterof8.5.1911,inauthor’spossession).
The situation was complicated by Ottoman regulations and laws covering the ownership and
export of antiquities (e.g. Shaw 2003). Western disdain and the nature of Ottoman provincial
administration ensured that decrees emanating from Constantinople were a nuisance rather than
an obstacle to thetrade, especiallysince thevalue oftabletswashardtodefine and clearlydid not
reside in the raw material, but there were some consequences. It was desirable to sell tablets on as
briskly as possible, and sometimes to destroy them to avoid incrimination. Accessible records of
the trade are scarce, but volumes of official correspondence in the British Museum (now in the
Department oftheMiddleEast),especiallythosefromthe1890s,holdmanylettersfromBaghdad
dealers, ranging from informative to bizarre: several addressed to Budge, who was on friendly
https://doi.org/10.1017/irq.2016.10 Published online by Cambridge University Press
166 JULIANEDGEWORTHREADE
termswithsomeofthefamilies,pleadinvainforspecialtreatmentbecausetabletshadbeenacquired
toraisecashfor marriagedowries.
The process of selecting tablets for acquisition was liable, as an incidental effect, to separate
fragments that really belonged together, creating split archives, “long-distance joins”, and
additional puzzles for future epigraphists (e.g. Veenhof 1986: 34–35). This accounts for
innumerable isolated groups. Their relationships are now in the long process of being put back
together through projects such as the Cuneiform Digital Library Initiative (http://cdli.ucla.edu).
However, “the historyof artifact acquisition is not well documented in CDLI” (website, 5.2.2016),
asthesiteismainlyconcernedwiththetextualcontentoftabletsratherthantheirrecentvicissitudes.
Tablets from unofficial excavations were distributed in different directions both through the
market and more casually, e.g. “it seems that he just took some tablets from Baghdad as a
souvenir” (Panayotov and Wunsch 2014: 199). Those from official excavations mostly went to
established institutions such as museums where they were relatively secure (although not always
widely known and/or accessible), and to university departments that could use them for
reference or teaching, but sometimes they went to all kinds of people who had made financial
or practical contributions to the work or were otherwise interested. Cuneiform tablets were thus
liable to be treated not as unique records but as typical examples of a genre, much like minor
uninscribed artefacts. Kelly (2011: 21), in connection with some Larsa tablets in the Weingreen
Museum in Dublin, gives a far-reaching discussion of all such matters. Finds from some of the
contemporary excavations in Egypt were dispersed in comparable ways.
Recordsoftheseinformalkindsofdistributionarescatteredandconfusing.Forinstancethereis
one tablet, an important letter from Ashurbanipal to a ruler of Dilmun, that was found during
Layard’s 1850 excavations at Kuyunjik and was apparently one of a number belonging to Mrs
Charlotte Rolland who had helped on the dig. She gave it to [Sir] Reginald St Johnson (1881–
1950) when he was a small boy, and he showed it about 1906 to the Assyriologist R. Campbell
Thompson, who transliterated it. In August 1910 St Johnston presented the tablet (and a bronze
armlet or pair of armlets from the same source) to the museum of Cheltenham College, but later
mistakenly told Campbell Thompson that he had given the tablet to the museum in the Falkland
Isles (letter, 7.2.1934; copy in author’s possession); this was wrongly repeated by Reade (2000:
421). Campbell Thompson (and Mallowan 1933: 103–04) published the transliteration in the
Liverpool Annals of Archaeology and Anthropology, stating that the tablet had been destroyed “in
a public museum … owing to an unfortunate accident to the building itself”. Really it was still in
Cheltenham, where it remained until the school museum closed. It was transferred to the
Merseyside Museum in 1976 and received the number 1976.159.312; it was illustrated, somewhat
the worse for wear and not yet identified, on the CDLI website (accessed 4.2.2016). Christine
Leighton (pers. comm., 4.2.2016), archivist of Cheltenham College, provided the details of St
Johnson’s original gift of the tablet and of the surprisingly apt transfer to Liverpool, the place of
itsoriginalpublication;IrvingFinkelconfirmedtheidentification.
Theremustbehundredsofsimilarstories.PamelaGuest,acousinofmine,oncetoldmehowinthe
1920sshehadvisitedanexcavationrunbyaFrenchmansomewherenearBaghdad.Shewasnotjusta
casual tourist, as her brother and host was the botanist Evan, and Lady Layard had been an aunt.
Pamela was duly given three small pots, which resided at the bottom of a display cabinet in her
cottage at Inkpen, Wiltshire. We concluded the site had been Kish, and she later presented her pots
totheAshmoleanMuseum,Oxford(1972.37–38;1975.309).MaxMallowan,whocontributedtothe
expensesofhisownexcavations,retainedacollectionofitemsthatnowbelongtotheNationalTrust
and are displayed at Greenway, his Devon home. There are alsotablets orfragments in the Carsten
Niebuhr Institute in Copenhagen, partly published by Fales (1987), which must derive from
Mallowan’s work at Nimrud. They do not seem to be included in the field catalogues, but these
anyway were never comprehensive, with commonplace items omitted at the director’s discretion
(Reade2002a:203).SinceJørgenLæssøeofCopenhagenwasavaluedmemberoftheNimrudteam
in the 1956–58 seasons, he presumably had these pieces as samples forreference and teaching. That
is the most recent example known to me of tablets being dispersed in this way from an official
excavation, though many archives have been excavated irregularly since the 1990s and dispersed
https://doi.org/10.1017/irq.2016.10 Published online by Cambridge University Press
THEMANUFACTURE,EVALUATIONANDCONSERVATIONOFCLAYTABLETSINSCRIBEDINCUNEIFORM167
throughthemarket.Suchfactorsensurethat,foreveryknowngroupoftablets,anunknownquantityof
associated or relevant evidence is liable to remain out of sight. Tablets differ from most collectible
antiquities,however,inthattheyoftencarrywithinthemselvesirrefutableevidenceoftheirorigin.
Other more fundamental considerations affecting the completeness of cuneiform archives as
historicalsourcesarethatancientoraltraditionsandknowledgeareboundtobeunderrepresented
in the written sources, and that systems such as urban and rural economies, and networks of
communities with shared interests, may have been operating independently, with some remaining
entirely detached and having no use for scribes and literacy. Also, many cuneiform texts were
written in wax or resin on writing-boards, while a range of other perishable materials were surely
employed (as in Yemen) for recording systems in cities in regions bordering western Asia, but
except in Egypt the documents are missing. Historical hypotheses derived from the written
evidencehavetoallowforuncertaintiesthatcannotbemeasuredneatly.
Tabletsasarchaeologicalartefacts
Tablets from excavations are archaeological artefacts, with basic characteristics like dimensions,
shape, surface features and provenance, but there have been divergent views on their status. “The
study of tablets as artefacts has a long but fitful history. Many questions have yet to be
formulated, let alone answered” (Taylor 2011: 5). They have been treated as the responsibility of
archaeologistorepigraphist,conservatororcurator:differentattitudeshaveledtoconfusion.Thus
archaeologists will normally wish to keep a record of items which are excavated together from a
single context, but these details may not concern all other specialists. Epigraphists can have their
own specialised concerns, and may even study a text without regard for its colophon or context.
Museum curators have been known to amalgamate groups of objects such as beads made of a
particularshapeor material,orfragmentsofglassofaparticularcolour,discardingarchaeological
associations, and they have done the same to clay tablets. Inscribed artefacts made of stone and
metal are usually accepted as ordinary objects deserving standard treatment and are safer from
neglect,butinscribedartefactsofclaycanbesegregatedinaclassoftheirown.
Thus,inthe1860s,thousandsofKCollectiontabletfragmentsfromsuccessiveexcavationshadnot
yetreceivedmuseumnumbers.Layarddidnotkeepthoroughrecordsoftabletprovenances,butmost
ofthosesentbyhimwerecertainlyfoundinoneareaoftheSouth-WestPalaceatNineveh,whereas
otherswerefoundlaterintheNorthPalace.Theboxesinwhichtheywerestoredshouldhaveincluded
someinformationabouttheirdateofarrivalandconsequentlyabouttheirprovenance.GeorgeSmith,
however, the young epigraphist working on the collection, sorted the fragments according to the
content of the texts (Smith 1875: 13); information about the provenances of tablets found before
1870 is largely lost as a result, and could not be included in the first K Collection catalogue
(Bezold 1889–99). A similar problem arose in the Iraq Museum in the 1980s, after an entire
library of scholarly texts had been excavated at Sippar (e.g. Al-Rawi and George 1990: 149). The
question waswhether the individual tablets should be recorded and classified by their findspot, as
was originally done by the archaeologists in the field, or by their subject-matter, which only
becameknownonceepigraphistswerereadingthetexts.
ThepreparationofCarlBezold’scataloguetooksometenyearslongerthanoriginallyexpected,
partlybecauseadditionaltabletswerefoundinstore(Budge1925:161–62).Thenmoretabletsfrom
KuyunjikreachedtheBritishMuseum,andsomepreviouslyuncataloguedfragmentswererecognised
as deserving study. Two supplementary volumes of the K Collection were published (King 1914;
Lambert and Millard 1966), both of which included all the provenance information that was
readily available. Then in 1975, as best described by Rykle Borger (1991: 44–45), yet more boxes
of unpublished tablet fragments from successive excavations in different areas of Kuyunjik
emerged from storage. Edmond Sollberger, the epigraphist who was then responsible for the
collection, decided to have them all fired in the museum before they were numbered and
catalogued; during this process the groups of fragments, whose dates of arrival had previously
been known, came to be mixed together, so that any information on provenance was lost. Also,
once fired, the fragments no longer had their original distinctive range of colours, ranging from
whitish to dark brown, and were roughly the same uniform reddish brown. Yet colour, like other
https://doi.org/10.1017/irq.2016.10 Published online by Cambridge University Press
168 JULIANEDGEWORTHREADE
typological features such as the likely size and proportions of the tablet to which a fragment once
belonged, its location at top, bottom, left, right orcentre of atablet, the width of columns of text,
prominent scribal habits or idiosyncrasies, and the condition and complementarities of broken
backs and edges, can greatly facilitate the identification of related fragments, as it can in any
collection of smashed archaeological material (e.g. Crawford 1966: 10; Reade 1975). Then the
artefactscanbereconstructedquicklyandeconomically,allthemoresoifthepersoninvolvedhas
no special knowledge and is therefore undistracted by interesting features such as, in the case of
cuneiformtablets,temptingscrapsoftext.Thissavesepigraphiststhelabouroftrawlingrepeatedly
throughminisculefragmentsorpublishedtransliterationsinsearchofphrasestheyrecognise.
Later, when the redoubtable Wilfred Lambert was listing all these new fragments for the third
supplementary catalogue of the K Collection (Lambert 1992), he was amused and dismayed to
find that a few tablet fragments, to which K numbers had just been assigned, did not retain any
tracesofcuneiformatall. He firmlyomitted these itemsfromhiscatalogue,and insistedthattheir
K numbers should be removed and allocated to inscribed fragments instead. It was not
particularly probable that any of these rejected plain fragments would make a significant
contribution to the restoration of atext, byproviding aphysical join between inscribed fragments,
but it does occasionally happen. Even a fragment with no original exterior surface at all has been
thevitalmatrixtowhichotherinscribedfragmentscould beattached,andIhaveknownthistobe
the only way of establishing the relationship between substantial portions of text. Archaeologists
are liable to discard plain ceramic sherds, sometimes too hastily, but they are unlikely to ignore in
this manner parts of other artefacts that lack specific superficial features, unless there is some
practical reason to do so. One day these and other relevant K Collection fragments may be
numbered and photographed, and an epigraphist can present abrief paper with their details, as a
fourth supplementary catalogue; there will be a chance of joins with other pieces once images of
theentirecollectionareavailableonline.
Therehavebeencomparablevagariesinothercontexts.“Thesandisemptiedoutofthebowlonto
thewirenet,whichactsasasieve,sothatthereisnochanceoflosingeventhemostminutefragment”
(Delougaz1933:53),because“notinfrequentlythehumblestfragmentmayturnouttobeakeyelement
in the reconstruction of some important document” (Sollberger 1965: ix). Yet others have dismissed
such things as “waste” (Wallis Budge, cf. Reade 1986a: xxvi) or as “virtually useless epigraphically”
(Saggs 1968: 156). I once heard an epigraphist with field experience express astonishment on seeing
three large pieces of tablet joined together to form a single whole. This raised the question whether
he was aware of the methods by which obvious physical joins between broken tablet fragments can
beidentified,andwhetherhehadappreciatedthescopeforjoinsamongfragmentsonwhichhehad
worked previously. On anotheroccasion I was myself reconstructing some six or seven tablets from
freshly excavated fragments on one tray, only to discover, when I went to fetch the remaining
fragments of the same tablets from two other trays in the next room, that an epigraphist had
decidedtheyweresuperfluous;hehadthereforedroppedthemintotheladies’latrine.Walker(2008:
255) has described how, at Isin and Warka in the 1960s, archaeologists and epigraphists hardly
communicated at all about the contents of tablets that were being excavated, cleaned and read on
site.Thearchaeologistslearntaboutthemthroughlettersfromcolleaguesathome.
Gibson (1972) addressed the division that had developed, between archaeological and
epigraphical disciplines, in relation to ancient Kish, and discussed what might be gained by
integrating the two sources of information. At Tell al Rimah the tablets and seal-impressions
excavated in position in the Old Babylonian palace illustrated an intricate relationship between
architectural and political evolution (Oates 1976: xii–xiii); their interpretation was not
straightforward, as maintenance and alterations can result in earlier documents overlying later
ones, and any failure to observe and coordinate the archaeological evidence correctly would have
turnedthesequenceoflocalrulersupsidedown.
Since the 1970s there have been so many good examples of integrating different categories of
evidence that it would be invidious to cite any as exceptional, but epigraphy and archaeology still
usually reside in separate university departments. I was once discouraged from initiating
interdisciplinarycooperationwithinauniversity,onthegroundsthatarchaeologywasself-sufficient.
https://doi.org/10.1017/irq.2016.10 Published online by Cambridge University Press
THEMANUFACTURE,EVALUATIONANDCONSERVATIONOFCLAYTABLETSINSCRIBEDINCUNEIFORM169
Asrecentlyas1998,theRencontreAssyriologiqueInternationale,theannualmeetingestablishedin1950
atwhichepigraphistsandarchaeologiststogetherpresentedtheirrecentworkontheancientNearEast,
was joined on the conference circuit by an independent biennial International Congress on the
Archaeology of the Ancient Near East. While both disciplines evolve and expand in complicated
ways, as described for the Neo-Assyrian period by Fales (2015), it remains the case that the
segregationofcuneiformtabletsfromassociateddatadevaluesboth.In2015twoseparatecolloquia,
in Bern and Cambridge,1 were held to discuss the problems of maintaining communication among
specialists.
Tabletclaysources
Althoughtextualcontentandarchaeologicalcontextarenearlyalwaysthemostsignificantfeatures
ofatabletorfragment,thereisadditionalinformation,environmentalandgeographical,thatcanbe
extracted from its physical constituents and characteristics. The earliest writing as we recognise it
developed in an alluvial flood-plain. People living there were familiar with local resources,
including clays out of which they shaped bricks, plaster, pottery, toys and so forth (e.g.
Plenderleith 1956: 319). Raw clay dissolves in water, it breaks easily, and it cracks in the sun,
although temper such as straw can help hold it together, but it is free, it is malleable when fresh
but hard when dry, and it is obviously the material on to which the earliest cuneiform signs are
likely to have been scratched or impressed. So it was the prime candidate for tablets holding
cuneiform records. The chemistry and the practical characteristics of clay and clay tablets are
describedbyTaylor(2011:5–12).
Anothercandidatewasgypsumpaste,usedinthelatefourthmillenniumatUruk(e.g.Reade1992:
178),whileHeuzey(1912:442)alludestoOldAkkadiantabletsfoundatTellohthatweremadeofclay
apparentlymixedwithabituminoussubstance,butallsuchalternativesrequiredadditionalpreparation.
Naturally“clay”prevailed,butthisterm,asgenerallyusednowadaystodescribethematerialoftablets
and some otherobjects, covers many varieties, variously coloured andwith or without deliberate or
randomvisibleorinvisibleinclusionsandirregularitiessuchassand,earthandgrit.
SomeunfiredclaytabletsfromsouthernIraqlookclean,butothersaredirty.Speciesofplanthave
beenidentifiedfromcharcoalflecksintheclay,presumablytheremainsoffuel,andtherearetracesof
molluscs such as snails “whose preferred habitat is in streams, rivers or irrigation canals”, which
suggests that these tablets were made at least in part from unprocessed alluvial clay (Cartwright
and Taylor 2011: 69–72). It has been hoped that microscopic traces of pollen in unfired and low-
fired clay vessels can help to reconstruct ancient environments (e.g. Yi-Feng Yao et al. 2012), but
Cartwright at theBritish Museum2015 seminarurgedcautionwhenattemptingto interpret pollen
present in clay tablets as a direct reflection of the floral environment at the time a tablet was
written.Shewrites(17.3.2015):
Pollenmayarriveatalocation,includinginaclaytablet,throughavarietyofmechanismssuchaswater,
wind and insect transport. Given clays are likely to form in an alluvial environment, there may be an
inbuiltbiastowardswater-bornepollengrainsofundefinedagesderivingfromplantsofaquatichabitats.
Different trees and shrubs produce varying quantities of pollen, thus introducing further complications
forinterpretationofthiscategoryofproxyevidence.Pollengrainsandsporesmaybecomeincorporated
intoclayswhentheyarebeingformed,thusintroducingafurtherlevelofchronologicalandprovenance
uncertainty.
Itcanbesensible,asmentionedbyDowman(1970:122),tokeepsamplesofclayfromtabletsbefore
they are fired or otherwise transmuted by conservation, but one need not expect too much of the
analysis.
Outside southern Iraq, Blackman (2003) identified some of the clays present in cuneiform
documents and sealings found at Tell Leilan, and distinguished different wadi systems in
1University of Bern, 27 June 2015. “Philology and EasternStudies.UniversityofCambridge,10–13December
Archaeology—Dialogue in Crisis”: conference following 2015.“TextualArchaeologyoftheAncientNearEast:Are
Rencontre Assyriologique Internationale 61 (theme “Text We Doing it Wrong?”: conference held at McDonald
and Image”). Sponsor: Swiss Society for Ancient Near InstituteforArchaeologicalResearch.
https://doi.org/10.1017/irq.2016.10 Published online by Cambridge University Press
170 JULIANEDGEWORTHREADE
north-easternSyriafromwhichtheyderived.Analysishasmadepossibletheidentificationofsource
areas, in Cyprus andwestern Syria, for the clays of royal letters sent to Egypt and found at Tell el-
Amarna (Goren et al. 2002). Cumulative evidence is needed for identifications like this, to avoid
mistakesdue tothe likelihood that,in manyoffices, the clayofdiscarded documentswasreused for
new ones. Taylor (2011: 21–23) cites many examples of recycling. Walker (pers. comm., 5.10.2015)
recalls how at Isin he handled lumps of clay, incorporating occasional cuneiform signs, that plainly
consistedofdiscardedtabletscrumpledtogetherandsometimesreusedasmortarinwallsorflooring.
Scribesmusthavelearnt,aspartoftheirtraining,wheretheycouldconvenientlygetclayofsuitable
quality,andhowtheyshouldprepareitforthemanufactureoftablets.Doubtlesstheyhadtheirown
favourite sources, and probably had different grades of clay or blank tablet to hand, perhaps all
taken from a single source but cleaned with varying degrees of thoroughness. Maidman (1999: 26)
contrasted the different qualities of clay and calligraphy displayed in two contemporary archives at
second-millennium Nuzi. Wiseman (1968: 175) noted that a few Middle Assyrian tablets with
official contents found at Rimah were “written in a skilled hand on a fine reddish clay”, unlike
tablets from the same context which dealt with commercial matters. This implies that the Rimah
scribes writing official tablets had deliberately chosen finer clay or prepared the clay better, while
privatelegalcontractsweremademorecasually.OntheotherhandHilprecht(1903:409),describing
the fifth-century Murashu business tablets from Nippur, noted “the great care with which they had
been made, the exceptionally pure and soft clay chosen”. Biggs (1974: 23), at third-millennium Tell
AbuSalabikh,speculatedthatafragmentmarkedwithatextileimpressionmighthavederivedfrom
“a scribe’s supply of damp clay wrapped in cloth to preserve its moisture”, but scribes also
improvised.ThereisadiverserangeofclaysinlettersthathadbeensentfromadistancetoAssyrian
kings: one royal command was written on a tablet “of coarse clay containing tiny stones” (Saggs
2001: 3), presumably taken from a stream or some such source by a scribe who could find nothing
better.Thereismoreevidenceofthisnaturescatteredinpublications(Taylor2011:6–7).
TheKCollectionconsistspartlyofadministrativerecords,drafts,letters,privatecontractsandso
on,andpartlyofso-calledlibrarytablets.The librarytextsarenotableforthehighqualityoftheir
material.Bezoldwhocataloguedmuchofthecollectionisclearlyreferringtothesewhenhesays:
Thetabletsvaryincolourfromdeepblacktoabrightred,andtheclayofwhichtheyaremadehasallthe
appearance of having been carefully chosen, thoroughly cleaned from sand and grit, andwell kneaded.
Specialcaremusthavebeenbestowedupontheselectionofthematerial.(Bezold1889–99:V,xv–xvi)
Walker (pers. comm., 17.8.2016) was told by David Kanikanian, who came of a familyof Mosul
potters, that each year they would go to the flood-plain between the Tigris and the walls of
Nineveh when the spring floods subsided, and extract fresh clay ready for the wheel. An
alternative is that the clean reddish or reddish brown clay of KCollection tablets, on the basis of
its colour, density and texture, was not fresh but ancient alluvial material, taken from deep clay
pits or from exposed or recently eroded geological stratathat were accessible throughout the year.
This may have been first suggested by Campbell Thompson (1929: 126, 134). Beside the Khosr
stream,closetoNineveh,thereis:
agorge,onesideofwhichisasteepandoftensheerbluffsome120feethigh,ofgoodredmarlfromwhichthe
Assyrianlibrariansprobablyobtainedtheirclay…Thegreaterpart[oftheNinevehtablets]werewrittenon
areddishclay,whichmusthavecomefromneartheAjilahdam,andalthoughwehavenottestedthisinthe
fire,itistobeassumedthatitwouldkeepitscolour.AsaruletheKouyunjiktabletsarebaked.
Thisquestionofbakingisdiscussedfurtherbelow.
SimilarlyatWadiTaya,south-eastofTel′AfarontheedgeoftheMiddleTigrisregion,alayerof
alabasterorgypsum(theso-calledMosulmarblecommonlyusedforAssyriansculptures)canbeseen
restingonalayeroffinegreyclay,whichisitselfaboveathickerlayeroffinereddishclay,whichis
itself above several layers of limestone, Fig. 2 (Reade 1986b: 218; 1998: 25, fig. 16 in colour). The
reddish clay is distinctive, it appears similar to that used in KCollection tablets, and its quality, at
least on superficial inspection, is outstanding. In the 1880s a farmer at Nineveh, who had
excavated some tablets and broken themup for fearof the Ottoman authorities, even claimed that
https://doi.org/10.1017/irq.2016.10 Published online by Cambridge University Press
THEMANUFACTURE,EVALUATIONANDCONSERVATIONOFCLAYTABLETSINSCRIBEDINCUNEIFORM171
Fig.2 OutcropwithgreyandredclaysstratifiedbelowgypsumrockatWadiTaya,Tel′Afar.Author’s
photograph,1973
“the dust was good for his land” (Budge, 8.5.1889, Middle East Department, Reports, 1887–89).
Nuha al-Radhi kindly fired a sample of the Taya clay together with some pottery of her own in
her electric kiln in Baghdad, to test whether it might have been used for third-millennium
stoneware vessels; she was unimpressed because it melted to a pale grey-green and stuck to the
wall,butIamunsurehowhighthetemperaturehadbeen.
Similar-looking clays were used for many of the Old Babylonian and Middle Assyrian tablets
excavated at Rimah. Lumps of such clay were also commonly found on the Rimah excavations,
and skilled workmen would recognise and describe them as “tablet clay”, but they were not
discarded tablets like those handled by Walker at Isin. Rather they had been part of the mudbrick
walls of structures that had once been built with clean material from clay pits. The same or
comparable layers of clay must have been exposed and accessible in places throughout the region
inantiquity,andbeenavailableforusebyscribes.
Thefinestvarietiesofclaycouldhavebeentradedfurtherafield,toareaslikeBabyloniawithout
equivalentresources:thereareafewfinelateBabyloniantabletsofunusualcontent,apparentlyfrom
Borsippa (e.g. BM 94043–93064), which are made of a clay different from that of many local
commercialtablets.Similarly,theclayforfilecopiesofroyalletterswritteninsideEgyptandfound
at Amarnawas not the local Nile clay commonly used for pottery but was derived from the Esna
shale formation much further upstream (Goren et al. 2002: 197). This would demonstrate the
long-distance movement of clay as a raw material, at least inside Egypt, if it were certain that
the clay was not reused and that the Egyptian king was not himself located upstream at the times
the letters were drafted. The possible long-distance movement of clay as a raw material or
commodity, added to the possibility that scribes sometimes carried small quantities of favourite
clay with them, does not discredit the identification of geographical sources for the clayof tablets
liketheAmarnaletters,butitdoesmeanthatsuchevidenceneedscarefulassessment.
Forinstance,someoftheAmarnaletterscomefromthekingofAlashiya.Oneofthese(EA34=
BME29789intheBritishMuseum)ismadeofdenseclay,palegreenish-brownincolour,whosehigh
quality,apparenttothenakedeye,immediatelysuggestsacleangeologicalratherthanrecentorigin.2
IthasbeenidentifiedasmarlfromthePakhnaformationinCyprus,ashastheclayoftwoothersuch
letters. This strongly supports the old proposal that Alashiyawas located on Cyprus (Goren et al.
2002: 198–99). Goren et al. add cautiously that “the literal similarity in names between Alashiya
and present-day Alassa [avillage in south-western Cyprus with suitable geology and a prominent
ancient site of the right period] may be noted”. On the other hand, while the map provided by
Goren et al. shows that this clay is not now available at Enkomi on the eastern coast of Cyprus,
2ForillustrationsofBritishMuseumitemscitedinthispaper,seethemuseumwebsite.
https://doi.org/10.1017/irq.2016.10 Published online by Cambridge University Press
172 JULIANEDGEWORTHREADE
whichistheisland’smostimposingsiteofthisperiod,itdoesalsoshowthatthePakhnaformationis
exposedonthesurfaceamere20kmsouth-westofEnkomi,andtheremayhavebeenmoreexposures
closertoEnkomiinthepast.Fineclayintendedfordiplomaticcorrespondencecouldeasilyhavebeen
brought to the capital of Alashiya from a modest distance, and the identification of a Pakhna
formation source for the clayof these letters therefore fails to disprove the otherold proposal that
Enkomi was itself the capital in question. Similarly, the clay of a letter sent from the king of
Mitanni in north-eastern Syria (EA 26=BM E 29794) may well be identifiable as associatedwith
a particular wadi system, just as the Leilan material has been, but an association like this could
not on its own identify the location of the Mitannian capital city, probably but not certainly
Fakhariyanear Ra’sal-’Ain. A letter sent bythe king of Karduniash or Babylonia (EA 9=BM E
29785) appears to be made, as one might have expected, of clean but probably less informative
palebrownalluvialclay.
Tabletmanufactureandtreatment
Taylor (2011: 7–12) has collected many examples of manufacturing processes. For instance, Biggs
(1974: 22) reported excavating at least two kinds of tablet of unfired clay at Abu Salabikh. A few
with a distinctive script had been “made in one piece”, but most had “a core of clay which is
smoothed in a somewhat irregular fashion”, with a surface layerof “fine clay, normally about 1.4
cm. thick. This surface layer separates very easily from the core”. Nearly 2000 years later,
Babylonian letters found at Nimrud “often have a surface layerof higher quality clayover a core;
examples of this also occur with the Assyrian tablets, although less commonly” (Saggs 2001: 2–3).
StilllatertheCyrusCylinderfromBabylon(c.635B.C.),althoughoffiredratherthanunfiredclay,
resembled the Abu Salabikh tablets in having “a slip of finer material wrapped around an inner
core of cruder nature” (Finkel 2013: 11). It would be possible, and possibly constructive, to create
a universal typology of the development of methods used to manufacture cuneiform tablets,
definedbytimeandplace,tojointraditionalcriterialikescript,language,functionandshape.
Thewayinwhichatabletwasmademayalsoaffectitsstateofpreservationintheground,butthis
isanareainwhichnogeneralisationsarevalid.Conditionscanvaryunpredictably.Thefirsttablets
foundatRimahinnorthernIraq,ajarfulofunfiredbusinessdocuments,wereveryfriableand“badly
encrustedwithsaltsfromthetopsoilinwhichtheyhadbeenlyingandwillrequiretreatmentbefore
theycan be read” (Oates 1965: 75; Wiseman 1968: 186–87); under Læssøe’s direction, weeven cut
through half-melted tablets in order to expose complete ones, before they could dry into one solid
lump. Such an unpleasant kind of problem would normally be associatedwith the salinated areas
of southern Iraq, where comments on the extreme fragility of tablets re-echo through the
generations, from Loftus (1857: 221) and Rassam (1897: 406), through Hilprecht (1903: 415–16)
and Delougaz (1933: 39–42), to Crawford (1966: 1–2) and Biggs (1974: 19–20). Many give good
detailed advice on how to excavate tablets, based on experience but liable to contradict equally
good advice given by those such as Liz Dowman (1970: 122, see below), who have excavated
tablets in different conditions. A further question is whether cleaning is best done by an
epigraphist (as recommended by Delougaz), by a conservator (as assumed by Dowman), or by
someone else. In practice there are no rules, except that the best qualifications include versatility,
as shown by Biggs’ comment (loc. cit.) about Selma al-Radhi [subsequently restorer of the
Amiriya complex in Yemen, and joint recipient of the 2007 Aga Khan Award for Architecture]:
her “extensive experience in field conservation of the Nimrud ivories had given her skills and
patience for the very tedious work on the tablets. Together we developed the techniques which
enabledustotreatthetabletssafely”,Fig.3.
Onemightsupposethatwaterwouldbeoneoftheworstpossiblesubstances touseforcleaning
water-soluble clay tablets, but even this can be done. Although Isin is in the south, Walker (pers.
comm., 5.10.2015) cleaned unfired tablets there whose exterior surface was in such a satisfactory
state that he was able to use a special tool for wetting the dirt embedded in cuneiform signs and
removing it without any apparent danger to the tablets at all. It seems possible that these Isin
tablets had a “skin”. This is another feature, besides heating or firing (discussed below), that may
reflectthetreatmentofacuneiformtabletafterithadbeeninscribed.
https://doi.org/10.1017/irq.2016.10 Published online by Cambridge University Press
THEMANUFACTURE,EVALUATIONANDCONSERVATIONOFCLAYTABLETSINSCRIBEDINCUNEIFORM173
Fig.3 Selmaal-RadhiandRobertBiggsgluingAbuSalabikhtabletsafterfiringatNippur,1965.Photograph:
McGuireGibson
ManyoftheOldBabyloniantabletsatRimah(Dalleyetal.1976)hadacomparablefeature.These
tabletshadbeenburiedundermassesofmudbrickwhenthebuildingholdingthemwasdemolished,
andtheyweregenerallyinexcellentconditionapartfrombreaks,Fig.4.Ihandledmanyinthefield
andtheyallappeared,sofarasIrecallthoughIhavenotfoundastatementtothiseffect,unfiredat
thetimeofexcavation.Theirexteriorsurfacetendedtoformanexiguouslayer,firmer,brownerand
darker in colour than the softer sometimes reddish interior. This is the kind of tablet of which
Dowman(1970:122),whowaspresentatsomeoftheRimahexcavations,wrote:
theworstofthedirtshouldalwaysberemovedassoonaspossibleafterexcavationbeforeithastimetodry
out;ifitwereleftthegreaterstressesrequiredtodisplaceitwhendrycouldwelldestroythesurfaceofthe
tablet.Somepeopleconsiderthatitisbettertoremoveallthedirtwhileitisdampandonatabletingood
conditionitdoesnotmattermuchonewayortheother;howeveritisusuallypreferabletoallowthefinedirt
adheringtothesurfacetodryoutforadayortwoafterwhichitcanbegentlypickedoffwithaneedleand
detachedrelativelyeasilyfromthefine“skin”ofthetabletor,iflooseenough,bebrushedoffwithasoft
brush(ahardonewillscratchthesurface).
Idonotknowanotherreferencetoalayerof“skin”ontablets.Perhapsitsformationresultedfrom
some habitual act such as greasing or handling in antiquity, if not from a chemical process
undergroundattheinterfaceofearthandclay.
Firedorunfired:tablets
Onceaclaytablethadbeeninscribed,itmusthavebeenallowedtodry,sothattheinscriptionbecame
stable.Thewaterremovedduringdryinginthiswaywasnotchemicallyboundtotheclay.Dryingcould
havebeenachievedinvariousways,withorwithoutexposuretoasourceofheatsuchasthesun.Some
tablets,however,weredeliberatelyfiredorheatedintoorbeyondthevariablerangeoftemperatures,
between 350° and 750° C, during which, among other changes, water that is chemically bound to
theclay,sometimescalled“combined”or“chemical”water,isremoved.Oncethe“combinedwater”
has gone, the malleable clay has been transformed irreversibly to rigid terracotta. Both operations,
however, the drying and the firing,can be leftincomplete, so that between clayand terracottathere
lieaninfinitenumberofintermediatestagesofdesiccation.Potterssometimesusetheterm“leather-
hard”foroneofthesestages,butthisistoopreciseforusewithtablets.
The tabletswere thenstored,hidden,discardedortrashedinvariouswaysinantiquity,andwere
buried for thousands of years, exposed to different temperatures, humidities, salinities and so on.
Anunfired tablet usually becomes damp in the soil; it may be permeated by soluble salts from the
groundwater,andsaltsmaycrystalliseonitssurfaceasamoreorlesssolidlayer.Afterexcavationa
https://doi.org/10.1017/irq.2016.10 Published online by Cambridge University Press
174 JULIANEDGEWORTHREADE
Fig.4 Daulahal-Talabal-AngudofSherqatexcavatingOldBabyloniantabletsatRimah,1967;theyhad
probablybeenstoredinabagorbasket.Photograph:J.D.Hawkins
tablet again dries and the clay hardens. If the tablet is made of high-quality clay and is not badly
affectedbysaltoradampatmosphere,itmayremainsolid;otherwiseresidualsaltsintheclaymay
migrate to the surface and cause fresh damage. Tablets also travel after excavation, from site to
store,andtheyarethenkeptinconditionsthatmayormaynotbestableandgeneratefurtherchanges.
Sothereisoftennoclearanswertotheseeminglyelementaryquestionastowhetherornotatablet
ismadeofunfiredclay,firedclay,orsomethinginbetweenthetwo.Ifatabletdoesturnouttohave
beenheated,itmaynotbeknownwhetherthishappenedinantiquityorinmoderntimes.Wiseman
andBlack(1996:8)stateintheirNimrudNabuTemplecatalogue:
Theinformation“notbaked”,“partlybaked”or“kiln-baked”istakenfromtheexcavationrecordsbutwas
notedthereonlyfortabletsfromthesixthseason(1955)withexcavationnumbersfrom4357to4405/1–80.
After excavation, some tablets were baked at the site (“kiln-baked”); others have since been baked for
conservationpurposes.
Itwouldbehelpfulifmorepublicationsoftabletsincludedpassageslikethis,butthatiseasiersaid
thandone,andthereisnoestablishedterminology.
Also, some available descriptions are more convincing than others. For example, here is a
descriptionoftheveryfirsttabletsexcavatedatRasShamrabySchaeffer(1929:295):
Noustrouvionsunegrandetabletteenterrecuitecouvertedecaractèrescunéiformesquifutbientôtsuivi
d’autres … Les tablettes, recuite par l’incendie, étaient très friables et il fallut employer de minutieuses
https://doi.org/10.1017/irq.2016.10 Published online by Cambridge University Press
THEMANUFACTURE,EVALUATIONANDCONSERVATIONOFCLAYTABLETSINSCRIBEDINCUNEIFORM175
précautionspourlessauver…Aprèsunlentséchageàl’ombredelatente,ellesregagnaientunecertaine
soliditéquipermettaitleurtransport.
Ifthisiscorrect,tabletsthathadbeenfiredtwiceinantiquity,firstdeliberatelyandsecondlywhenthe
buildinghousingthemwasburnt,wereveryfriablebutbecamestrongeroncedry;thissoundsmuch
more like the behaviour of tablets that had not originally been fired. A simple explanation for
Schaeffer’s account is that he was not yet familiar with cuneiform tablets, and automatically
assumed,whenhesuddenlyfoundsome,thattheyhadbeendeliberatelyfired.
The problem goesbacktothe start ofcuneiform studies. Thus some tabletsfrom Warka, which
William Loftus excavated in 1850, were described by him as “unbaked”, but as “baked” by Henry
Rawlinson,whosawthemsoonafterwardsinBaghdad(Loftus1857:221–22).HaroldPlenderleith
(1956: 319), who was familiar with the British Museum collection, described the situation as
follows: “there are thus three types of material presented for conservation — baked clay, unbaked
clay,andclaythathasbeeninadequatelybaked”.Theterm“inadequate”impliesfailure,like“half-
baked”, a judgement we are not entitled to make since the condition could have been created
intentionally. Organ (1961: 52), in discussing the conservation of the same collection, states that
the material of the tablets was “usually sun-dried clay, only the less ephemeral literature having
been hardened by heating strongly”, which suggests an understandable reluctance to define the
term “heating strongly”. Both Plenderleith and Organ may have been thinking especiallyof the K
Collection library tablets, which are particularly troublesome in this regard. Reade (1986b: 218–
19) may be too simplistic in describing them as either “deliberately baked or not”. Taylor (2011:
16) may be too emphatic in stating that “only rarely in antiquity were tablets baked”. Evenifonly
“ahandfulofNeo-Babyloniancolophonsanddocumentsattestthepractice”inwriting,thetablets
themselvestellamorecomplicatedstory.
A general criterion for determining whether an inscribed clay object is likely to have been
deliberately fired in antiquity is its original function. In Iraq, through prehistoric and historical
periods in both south and north, there had been a long tradition of making containers and other
objects offired clay, and the advantages of this material were familiar. Fittings such as bricks and
tiles designed for use on exposed exteriors or in internal spaces vulnerable towater were naturally
fired when possible. In major government buildings they were commonly stamped or impressed
with details of royal names and titles or achievements. Nails, knobs, cones and other visible
commemorative features were fired. Another kind of inscribed object is the permanent memorial
record, deposited inside brickwork, and these too were fired (Taylor 2011: 25). The original
practice of using stone for hidden memorial records was ultimately superseded by the use of fired
clay, which could more easily accommodate much longer inscriptions. Some of these longer
recordswere shaped as tablets, but therewere also round and polygonal cylinders, hollowor solid,
especially in the seventh and sixth centuries B.C. Other types of inscribed object of fired clay
includethingsthathadtobewornorregularlymoved,suchasamulets.
Aconvenientthoughnotinfalliblemethodofseeingwhetheraninscribedobjectislikelytohave
beenfiredisthroughthepresenceorabsenceoftemperintheclay.Forinstance,intheKCollection,
there are very many fragments coveredwith historical records written in smallish script. Some do
derive from tablets (e.g. Grayson and Novotny 2014: 5–8), but many others, though superficially
resemblingfragmentsoftablet,canreallybeidentifiedasfragmentsofmemorialcylindersinstead.
While some cylinders may have been stored in the Nineveh libraries, as does seem to have
happened in the Nabu Temple at Nimrud (Wiseman and Black 1996: 4–5), they could all in
practice have come from inside the walls of buildings or from the scriptoria where they were
prepared. Many of the actual cylinders were made and fired like ordinary ceramic vessels, having
internalwheelorcoilmarks,butevensmallfragmentstendtobedistinctincontour,thicknessand
fabric, andwith ample traces oforganic temper such as fine chopped straw which was mixedwith
theclayandvaporised during firing in thekiln. Voidsleft bytemperarevisible in brokensurfaces,
and often also on outer surfaces, although a fine slip covering most external irregularities was
added before the scribe wrote the text (e.g. Taylor 2011: 26, fig. 1.9). This deliberate organic
tempercannormallybedistinguishedfromtheoccasionaltracesoforganicmaterialthatareliable
https://doi.org/10.1017/irq.2016.10 Published online by Cambridge University Press
176 JULIANEDGEWORTHREADE
tobepresentintheclayofanytabletbymistake.Ifdeliberatetemper,likethatpresentinamemorial
cylinder, is visible in a fragment of some other kind of inscribed object, its presence will normally
imply that the object was fired. This is most obvious in something like a fragment of brick. There
are no safe rules, however, because some of the very earliest known of all inscribed bricks, those
from Tell Brak stamped with the name of Naram-Sin of Agade, are said to be unfired sun-dried
mudbricks(Mallowan1947:66).
Furthermore, some fine terracottavesselswere madewith very little visible temper, and sowere
some fired tablets. A good example of the latter is K 3751, which is in the KCollection but was
excavated at Nimrud, andwhich is identified by its text as commemorating the foundation of the
palace of Tiglath-pileser III about 730 B.C. (Tadmor and Yamada 2011: 115–25). It was probably
once placed or designed to be placed somewhere inside the structure of the palace, and taken to
the Nabu Temple afterwards, when the palace was dismantled. What survives is half of a tablet,
24cmwideand upto4cmthick; thewholemustoriginallyhavebeen atleast40cmhigh.Ithasa
compactpalepinkishbrownbodywithagreenishbrownsurface;somefineorganicmaterialinthe
body has left a few voids, surely representing impurities rather than temper. A small patch of
inscribed surface has flaked away, but there is no reason to suppose that the tablet had been
damaged by fire in a burning building. This tablet was manifestly fired in antiquity, just as its
original function would have suggested. Some red clay stuck firmly to some broken internal
surfaces suggests that it may also have been heated since, perhaps in the British Museum for
cleaning, but it was not fired there to a high temperature, since it retains a nineteenth-century ink
label which would have been destroyed by very intense heat. So that is one tablet, even without
unmistakabletemper,thathadbeendeliberatelyfiredinantiquity.Therefore,theabsenceofvisible
temperinatabletdoesnotdemonstratethatitwasnotfiredinantiquity.
Firing,whichconferreddurabilityonfoundationdocumentslikeK3751,mayreflecttheoriginal
status and function of other kinds of tablet too. They became strong enough to take repeated
handling, like hardback rather than paperback books. Thus at Warka, in an archive of mainly
unfired documents, the title-deeds recording purchases are recorded as having been fired (Hunger
1970: 197; Veenhof 1986: 1): these were proofs of ownership, and had long-term value. At
Sultantepe (Gurney 1952) most of the tablets may derive from a scribal school, and are said to
have been unfired. One of them, in contrast, a mathematical table of reciprocals, was fired. An
obvious reason would be that it was not an ephemeral exercise tablet and that it needed to be
strongenoughtotolerateregularuse.
ManyMiddleAssyrianliterarytabletswereunquestionablyfiredinantiquitylikeK3751,havinga
characteristicwhitishsurface.Thefiringcouldhavebeendonestraightforwardlyforlong-termuseand
reference,justasacolophonorahandlemayunequivocallyconfirmatablet’ssignificanceorcanonical
status,buttherecouldhavebeenothermotivestoo.AnexampleintheKCollection(Rm376:Lambert
1965) is an incantation tablet found at Nimrud (according to the original museum record, not at
Nineveh). It relates to difficult childbirths, and could have been carried by the doctor attending a
patient. While one might have expected a capable doctor to recite the text from memory, a tablet
might have given him greater authority. Some other tabletswere perhaps fired because they needed
to be handled often or read at ceremonies. Examples of fired tablets which might have had a
ceremonial purpose include the Middle Assyrian Tukulti-Ninurta Epic (Lambert 1957: BM
121033), whichcame fromtheIshtarTempleat Nineveh,theNeo-Assyrian“letter togod” (Louvre
AO5372:Oppenheim1960:143),andtheKhorsabadking-list(Lambert1957:39).
Thequestionwhetheratabletwasfiredinantiquitymayberelevanttoitsstatus.Forinstance,one
piecethatwasbuiltintothebaseofawallatRimah,whichIpersonallyregardedin1968asaschool
exercise tablet of unfired clay, resembling others found in a earlier Old Babylonian level a few feet
away, was inscribedwith abrief “foundation inscription” text, incorporating a royal name and the
name of a city. If the tablet was a school exercise, then it has no authority as evidence for the
ancient name of Rimah itself. It was published, however, as being made of “baked clay” (Oates
1970: 4; Walker 1970: 27); if this is correct, it probably was an authentic memorial document,
which raises the question whether the name on the tablet was that of ancient Rimah or of a
different city nearby, and, if the latter, how the tablet came to be buriedwhere it was. Its original
https://doi.org/10.1017/irq.2016.10 Published online by Cambridge University Press
THEMANUFACTURE,EVALUATIONANDCONSERVATIONOFCLAYTABLETSINSCRIBEDINCUNEIFORM177
condition—fired or unfired—could no longer be checked once it had been fired in a modern kiln
(Sollberger1976:v).
Lambert(1965:283)explainedthestrikingcolourofthefiredMiddleAssyriantabletsasfollows:
Tabletsbakedtoabout650°centigradehavearedcolour…,atemperaturereachingabout750°yieldsa
whitish colour, and if still more heat is applied tablets are ruined because vitrification and a greenish
colour result. The chief difference between ancient and modern firing is that the electric kiln supplies
continuous heat for any length of time while ancient fuel burnt out quickly. Since the Babylonians and
Assyrians had no large supply of wood for burning, such things as dry reeds and palm fronds were
commonly used. Thus the Middle Assyrian scribes had their tablets baked to the highest safe
temperature, but the maximum was reached for only the shortest period, as the fuel was quickly
expended.Theextremeheatinconsequenceaffectedonlytheoutersurface;theinnerpartsofthetablets
areofothercolours.
This account stands out as a sensible attempt to ascertain what really happened, but omits to
mention the availability of animal dung as a fuel: the marsh Arabs of southern Iraq were using
dung patties to fire pottery in the 1970–80s (Ochsenschlager 2004: 119–21). Most tablets can also
be fired safely far above 750°C, to judge by the maximum temperature of 1600° recommended by
Delougaz (1933: 52). It is also evident from the quality of their products that Assyrian potters
were capable of controlling kilns very efficiently, and scribes must have had access to comparable
skills. The latter certainly demonstrated the ability to fire tablets so that they became terracotta,
andtheymustalsohavebeenabletheoreticallyeithertoheatthemtoanintermediatetemperature
at which, without becoming fully fired terracotta, they became much more durable than unfired
clay, or to desiccate them, perhaps by “heating strongly” in the phrase offered by Organ (1961:
52),inwhichcasetheybecamesomewhatmoredurablethantheywouldhavebeenifsimplyleftto
dry. Thiswould create the three types of material observed byPlenderleith (1956: 319), andwould
conform with the conclusions reached independently, at Knossos on the far western edge of the
tabletworld,bySirArthurEvans(1935:592–93).
AllthelibrarytabletsoftheKCollectionmustoncehavefallensomewhereonthisspectrum.These
tabletsderivefromatleastfourplaces—theSouth-WestandNorthPalaces,andtheIshtarandNabu
Temples(Reade2000:421–27;2005:382);afewhundredcanbeidentifiedarchaeologicallyascoming
from specific places, but most of the provenances were confused, first in antiquity, and then by
archaeologists, epigraphists and museum curators as outlined above. Some tablets belonged, or had
once belonged, to private scribal collections; some have Middle Assyrian, or Neo-Assyrian, or
Babylonian characteristics, and so on; some may have been waiting to be transcribed or updated,
somemayhavebeensupersededorrejected,somethatborepalaceortemplecolophonswereprobably
final fair copies. While a good proportion of the fragments have been classified by traditional
Assyriological methods into distinct and significant groups, and thiswork continues, they could also
be classified by correlating physical characteristics. Identification of more Ishtar Temple texts, which
tendtobeearly,“mighthelpinourgraspofAssyrianintellectualhistoryiftheprojectwereofinterest
toaphilologist”(Reade2005:382),andthereareequivalentpotentialitieswiththepalacetabletstoo.
Oneofthephysicalcharacteristicswouldbewhetherthetabletsweredeliberatelyfiredinantiquity.
Layard,whofoundahighproportionoftheKCollection,describedoneverysmallgroup(actually
letterssentfromelsewhere)asmadeof“darkunbakedclay”,whichdemonstrateshisawarenessofthis
kindofmaterial(Layard1849:II,124).Mostlyhistabletswere“baked”(Layard1853:344–47),which
isprobablyageneralization,referringtothebulkofthelibrarytexts.HiscolleagueHormuzdRassam,
whocontinuedtheexcavations,repeatedlydescribestheNinevehtabletsas“terracottas”,atermhe
must have learnt from Layard. It was also used by Smith (1875: 13), who referred to the “many
boxesfull offragments ofterracottatablets” which had reached theBritish Museum by1855from
Layard and others. Bezold stated that “in no collection from any other site are the tablets so well
shaped and so well baked” (Bezold 1889–89: V, xv–xvi). But the tablets were largely excavated
from buildings that had been destroyed by fire, and there are indeed some among them (e.g. K
5967)thathad been not onlyfiredbutpartlyvitrified and/ordistorted byintense heat. There must
be plenty that were heated to a significant temperature during these fires, without reaching
vitrification. Moreover there is the confusing factor that the clays available in the Middle Tigris
https://doi.org/10.1017/irq.2016.10 Published online by Cambridge University Press
178 JULIANEDGEWORTHREADE
region can have, even when they are unfired, a reddish colour resembling the colour of fired
terracotta, cf. Fig. 2. What prospect is thereof knowing what the library tablets looked likebefore
theconflagrations?
NearlyallthelibrarytabletsfoundintheNabuTempleatNimrud,slightlyearlierthanorroughly
contemporary with those from Kuyunjik, do seem to have been left unfired (Wiseman and Black
1996).Similarly,atSultantepe,soonafterexcavation:
thetabletsweredryingoutwell,anditwaspossibletobrushofftheaccumulationsofearthfrommanyof
themwithoutdamage.Others,however,resistedthissuperficialtreatmentandwillhavetobebakedbefore
anepigraphistcanbegintoworkonthem.(Gurney1952:25)
ThenaturalconclusionmightseemtobethattheKuyunjikNeo-Assyrianlibrarytabletsshouldalso
havebeenleftunfired,asmayindeed have happenedwiththetablets oftheNinevehNabu Temple
library,butthereisthepossibilitythatadifferentpolicywasfollowedwiththeking’scollections.
Itisnotmerelythattheearlyexcavatorsandepigraphistsneverseemworriedaboutthecondition
of the main groups of Nineveh library tablets, except for the presence of salty encrustation on the
surface, and nearly always describe them as terracotta. Plainly the exact conditions of burial
varied, and some were undoubtedly burnt in the palaces, but an alternative explanation for the
excellent preservation of so many K Collection library tablets could be that some of them were
deliberately fired, as was indeed done to the Middle Assyrian pieces, and that others were
strengthenedbydeliberateheatinginantiquity.
Howfarcanthishypothesisbetested?TheKCollectiontabletsareliabletohavesuchcomplicated
paststhateachofthemhastobeassessedseparately.Muchoftheevidenceforthestateofthesetablets
atthetimeofexcavationhasbeenor mayhavebeendamagedordestroyed,especiallybycleaning,
before 1920 by heating to 150° C and/or the application of hydrochloric acid, and since 1955 by
heatingto700or750°Candmoreacid.Some,suchasK9785+15900+16810,consistofjoining
fragments that arenowof different colours. Featuresthat do frequently survive, however, and that
may conceivably help to decide this issue once all the associated evidence has been accumulated,
aretheso-called“dryingholes”inthesidesoftablets;thesearediscussedbelow.
TherearecomparablequestionsovertheoriginalconditionoftabletsfoundatthemajorAnatolian
sites, Boghazköy and Kültepe; Schachner (pers. comm. 24.2.2015) confirms that they will have been
hardenedin secondaryfireswhichdestroyed buildingsthere, but it remainsunclearwhetheranymay
have been deliberately hardened beforehand. Similarly, Paolo Matthiae (pers. comm., 24.2.2015)
confirms that most of the Mardikh tablets were in good condition, and he therefore did not have
themfiredafterexcavation;thesewerenotburnt,buttheirconditionbeforeburialislesseasytoascertain.
AnothermajorcollectionofadministrativetabletswasexcavatedatPersepolisinthe1930sbythe
OrientalInstituteoftheUniversityofChicago.MattStolper(pers.comm.,23.2.2015)remarksthat
AlbertOlmstead[celebratedhistorianofthePersianEmpire]couldnotresisttheironyintheideathat
Alexander the Great, by burning Persepolis, fired the tablets there and so saved them. In reality,
however, these tablets had not been fired in antiquity. Some were fired in modern times, probably
inthe1970sattheUniversity’sMidwayStudios.
“Dryingholes”
Both narrow sides of the fired Tiglath-pileser III foundation tablet discussed above (K 3751) are
penetrated by several deep round holes, c. 0.3cm in diameter. Holes of this nature in the sides of
tablets were possibly introduced during the Middle Assyrian period (Walker 1989: 11). They are
present in many library tablets in the K Collection, although many other such tablets of similar
dimensionsinthesamecollectiondonotpossessthem.
Theholeswerepresumablycreatedbyinsertingrodsintothedampclaywhiletabletswerebeing
formed, before they were inscribed. As Guinan et al. (1976: 45) may havebeen the first to suggest
in print, holes penetrating the damp clay could have facilitated the safe slow heating and cooling
of a tablet, providing outlets for water vapour to escape during the process of drying and heating
up to and above 100° C. Afterwards, as noted by Finkel (pers. comm.), if thin rods of organic
materialwere used to make the holes, they would havedisappeared during heating or firing. If the
https://doi.org/10.1017/irq.2016.10 Published online by Cambridge University Press
THEMANUFACTURE,EVALUATIONANDCONSERVATIONOFCLAYTABLETSINSCRIBEDINCUNEIFORM179
tablet was being fired at 350° C and more, the holes would have facilitated the escape of the
“combined water” too. Therefore Assyriologists usually call them “firing holes”, which is at first
sight an appropriate term; Taylor (2011: 15–16) has suggested that “drying holes” may be
preferable. While it is undeniable that these holes would have facilitated drying, it is slightly
surprising,ifthiswasindeedtheirprimepurpose,thattheyarenotlargerandmorenumerous,and
thattheyarenotfoundmoreconsistentlyontabletsofsimilarsizeandapparentstatus.
Acomplicationisthatthereareholesofanotherkindforwhichthesamename,“dryinghole”,has
beenusedlessaptly.Theseotherholeswereimpressednotintothesidesbutintothefrontandback
surfacesoftabletsafterorduringtheprocessofinscription(e.g.K3751);theirdiametertendstobe
less,e.g.0.1–0.2cm.Thereareplentyoftabletswithholesinthesesurfacesbutnotintheirsides(e.g.
K47,50,160,3121).Sometimestheseholesinthesurfacesareimpresseddeeplyandsymmetrically,
but they still only tend to be placed in areas that are otherwise blank, or in the spaces between
columns or lines of text (e.g. K 39: Taylor 2011: 17, fig. 1.6); yet they can also be inside a
cuneiform sign. Such arrangements of holes in the faces of tabletswould not havebeen efficient in
facilitatingtheescapeofwatervapour.
Commonly,whentherearetheseholesinthesurfacesoftablets,theyarearrangednotsymmetrically
but in patterns that are irregular yet, as Taylor says, “not entirely random”. Finkel has drawn my
attention to an early example of such superficial patterning on a Middle Babylonian tablet where
the surface is marked by many small depressions that are ovoid rather than circular (Jeyes 2000:
373, fig. 4). On K Collection tablets, it sometimes looks as if the holes had a decorative or other
specific purpose, or were intended to denote that the tablet was a fine final canonical version. A
tablet from the Nabu Temple at Nimrud, however, which has similar holes, also has numerous
erasures,andisdescribedas“probablyscribalpractice”(WisemanandBlack1996:26,no.171).
Itseemspossiblethatsimpletypology,definingthesize,shape,subject-matter,scriptandtextof
tablets, and grouping physical sets of tablets with shared characteristics, would lead to the
identification of patterns explaining the presenceofone or both of the types of “dryinghole”. The
published catalogues and databases do not yet include all these kinds of information which might
in turn clarify how far, if at all, the tabletswere deliberately fired in antiquity, and how the tablet
librarieswereorganised.
Firedorunfired:objectsotherthantablets
The problem of distinguishing between fired and unfired clay also arises with objects other than
inscribed tablets, and can influence how they are treated. Even the standard compendium of
ancient Mesopotamian materials fails to draw a systematic distinction between fired, unfired and
partly fired clay objects (Moorey 1994: 163), and plenty of them are described differently by
different authorities. The problem is exacerbated by the fact that the word “terracotta”, among
English-speakersunfamiliarwithItalian,hasapparentlyacquiredtwomeanings,referringnotonly
to fired clay but to objects such as clay figurines generally. I once found a number of figurines
stored together as “terracottas”, and a programme of desalination by soaking in distilled water
wasin progress. It seemed provident to remove the unfired figurines to a separate drawer, but they
soonreturnedtotheirpreviousposition.
Ifanitemofunfiredclayisidentifiedasterracottaandtreatedwithwaterinordertocleanitorto
removesalts,thensoonerorlateritbeginstounexpectedlymelt.Ihaveoccasionallyseenthishappento
smallrecentlyexcavatedobjectsinIraq.Thesameprocessmayhaveinitiatedthechangeinappearance
of a remarkable head, which had been purchased by the British Museum from the dealer Géjou as
“terracotta” in 1926 (BM 118062: Reade 2002b: 155, figs. 24–25). A rubber-stamp on the old file-
card covering this piece records it as having been fired in the museum, presumably after it had
beguntomeltwhensoaked.Thestampisundated,butthefiring,whichmusthavehappenedbefore
1975,mayhavebeenresponsibleforflakingofthesurfacethatcontinuedsubsequently.
There is a celebrated painted clay head in the same museum (BM 122934), which appears as
“ceramic” or “fired” both in a 2008 exhibition catalogue from the Metropolitan Museum of Art
(Aruz et al. 2008: 23) and on the British Museum website (20.2.2015). I too once regarded it as
fired; later, after close inspection, I described it as very fine unfired clay, but it may, while clearly
https://doi.org/10.1017/irq.2016.10 Published online by Cambridge University Press
180 JULIANEDGEWORTHREADE
notfired,havebeenhardenedinantiquitybyexposuretoheat(Reade1991:2;2002b:161).Thishead
wasexcavatedatUr,wheremanyartefactsarebadlyaffectedbysalts,althoughnotapparentlythis
one. Its surface also retains ample paint, vulnerable in any case and probably soluble in water, so
that it unlike the Géjou head may be safe from inadvertent soaking and/or firing. The same
applies to five painted and inscribed magical dog figurines from Nineveh (BM 30001–05). The
manufacture offigurines like this fromunfired clay is prescribed in ritual texts, so their material is
plain, but these five were still described ambiguously as “clay” in a catalogue (Curtis and Reade
1995: 116–17) and as “fired clay” on the museum website (10.3.2015). Another kind of painted
magical figurine excavated at Nineveh in 1989–90 has been described as “lightly-fired pale buff
clay” (Pickworth 2005: 305); unfired Assyrian figurines do look lightly fired, as clay dries hard,
but they were made by hand and buried promptly. There may be many other clay objects in
museumswhich are at riskof being mistaken for terracottas. Even when an object is indeed made
ofterracotta,itcanbeatriskoflosingtracesofpaintthatareonlyvisibleinunobtrusiverecesses.
The organic residues that sometimes survive on and inside clay are also vulnerable to well-
intentioned cleaning: for instance, small ceramic bottles, excavated complete from graves, have
sometimesbeenknowntoreleaseafaintsmellofperfumeduringdesalinationbysoakinginwater.
Ancient texts include many references to ritual anointing; if traces of this kind of process survive
inoronclayfoundationdocumentsthatwereonceanointed,theytoomighteasilybewashedaway.
TreatmentoftabletsintheBritishMuseum,1850–1855:JohnDoubleday,immersiontechniques,and
thefirstattemptsatfiring
Between 1850 and 1910 the British Museum acquired innumerable tablets, complete and broken.
They came mainly from northern and southern Iraq, both through official excavations and
through purchase. Most of the numbered pieces are now stored individually in glass-topped
cardboard boxes lined with a soft material, which was originally cotton-wool but is now mainly
plastazote, a polyethylene foam. The systematic boxing of tablets was introduced in 1883
according to Wallis Budge (1925: 156–57), who joined the museum staff in that year and became
Head of Department ten years later. This method of storage facilitates access, protects the tablets
fromcasualdamage,providesadegreeofenvironmentalstability,andhasbeenadoptedelsewhere,
but it does not address problems of cleaning and conservation. All tablets that arrived in London
had already displayed a certain resilience, by even surviving the journey. Some of the acquisitions
seem to have been trouble-free: thus the Amarna tablets from Egypt, which are unfired, were at
least clean enough to be partly legible soon after they had been found, and all those that I have
inspectedappearsolidandstable.Withsomeothergroupsthereweredifficulties.
Already,soonafterthefirstseriousexcavationsoftabletsinwhatisnowIraq,ageneraldifference
wasobservedbetweenthosefromnorthernandthosefromsouthernsites.Layard(1853:564)wrote
thatthesouthernWarkatabletsare:
lesswellpreservedthanthemoreancientdocumentsinthesamematerial,discoveredintheAssyrianruins
[Nineveh],andmanyofthemhavecrumbledaway.Thisisowingtothenitrousnatureofthesoilcoveringthe
remainsinBabylonia,andperhapsalsooftheclayoutofwhichtheseobjects,aswellasthepotteryofthe
country,wasmade.Itthrowsoutakindofwhiteefflorescence,andgraduallyfallstopieces.
Layard is referring to tablets that have been buried in alluvial areas of Babylonia without good
drainage and that are liable, unless protected by special factors, to suffer from the same notorious
salinationasthesoilaroundthem.Headdshopefullythat:
theinscribedtablets…havebeenpartlyrestoredbythesameprocessastheivoriesfromNimroud,nowin
theBritishMuseum.Theyhavebeenboiledinaglutinoussubstance,whichhaspenetratedintothevery
heartoftheclay,andisexpectedtopreventitsfurtherdecay.
Possibly theword “glutinous” herewasa mistake for “gelatinous”. Assyrian ivorieswere indeed
successfullyboiledingelatineatthattime,andanerratumslipinanearlierbookbyLayard(1849:
I, after p. xxxi; II, 9) corrects glutinous to gelatinous with reference to the treatment of ivory. Sir
John Herschel, however, when consulted about a comparable problem with exfoliating Egyptian
https://doi.org/10.1017/irq.2016.10 Published online by Cambridge University Press
THEMANUFACTURE,EVALUATIONANDCONSERVATIONOFCLAYTABLETSINSCRIBEDINCUNEIFORM181
stelasin1847,hadrecommendedsoakingindistilledwaterfollowed,ifnecessary,byvarnishingwith
awaterproofresinthatwould“drywithacertaincohesionorglutinousness”(Reade2008:18–19).So
effortsatconservationtheninvolvedbothglutinousandgelatinoussubstances.
Budge gives avery full and vivid account of the museum’s first attempts at the conservation of
tablets. For events before the 1870s he must have relied on hearsay, such as the reminiscences of
SamuelBirch.Budge had ahabit ofembroideringthetruth (Reade2011: 454–57), buthisaccount
issupportedbyoccasionalofficialrecordsandisbroadlyconvincing.
Thetablets[whicharrivedduring1850–1855]weretieduplooselyinnativereedbasketsandplacedinboxes
withoutfurtherpacking.Allwerecoveredwithathickcoatingofdustandearth,whichwaseasilyremoved
bycarefulbrushing;butthereweremanyhundredswithlargepatchesofacrystallinedepositadheringto
their surfaces, and these rendered it impossible to see the inscriptions beneath them. The tablets from
Ninevehwere…madeofbakedclay,butmanyofthosethatcamefromWarka,Sankaraandothersites
inLowerBabyloniahadonlybeensun-dried.Manyofthelatteralsohadpatchesofacrystallinedeposit
adhering to them; and when an attempt was made to remove them, the tablet crumbled in the hand,
leaving the deposit intact. Sometimes the patches of crystals came away from the tablets easily; but
portions of the surfaces of the tabletscame away with them, and the inscriptionswere mutilated. Many
of the unbaked tablets had broken as they were being taken from the ground, and those that were
removed in an entire state often cracked and broke into fragments, or crumbled into dust. None of the
officials in the British Museumknewwhat stepsshould betakento remove the crystallinedeposit from
thetablets,orhowtopreventthemfromcrumblingintodust,andnoexpertassistancewastobehad;for
no cleaner or repairer of antiquities had any experience in such work. Mr Doubleday, the repairer
employed by the Trustees [the governing body of the museum] at that time, made various suggestions
andwas allowed to treat some of the tablets, but the results were disastrous. He attempted to bake the
unbakedBabyloniantablets,beingconvincedthathecouldmakethemashardasthebakedtabletsfrom
Nineveh; but the result of his ‘firing the tablet’ was that the whole surface of both sides of each tablet
flaked off and fell into dust, and the inscriptions were lost for ever. Then he made attempts to
consolidatethetabletsbyimmersingtheminspeciallypreparedpreservativesolutions;butthesetoowere
unsuccessful; forthe tablets disintegrated,andlay inheapson thebottom of thevessel. Atlength Birch
stopped the experiments, and nothing further was done in the way of cleaning the tablets for three or
fouryears—infact,notuntilafterthedeathofMrDoubleday[on25January,1856].(Budge1925:147–49)
John Doubleday was a capable man, best known for repairing the Portland Vase, and his
experiments will have been more thoughtful than this account implies. Even if not yet successful,
they anticipate the techniques that did later develop and that were obliged to confront not one
problem but two. The tablets had to be cleaned, so that they were legible, and they had to be
conserved,sothattheywerestable,butthetwoproblemsinviteddifferentapproaches.
One of Doubleday’s “preservative” solutions must have corresponded to the saturation with
gelatine or gluten mentioned by Layard. This itself was surely a dead end, but there have been
more recent experiments with saturation. One method that Doubleday could well have tried was
immersion in hydrochloric acid. Because it dissolves calcium carbonate, this substance often
reappears in the history of attempts at tablet cleaning and conservation. It was to be one of the
first techniques recorded by Friedrich Rathgen (1898: 72–73), Director of the Chemical
LaboratoryoftheRoyalMuseumsofBerlinwhobecamethefatherofarchaeologicalconservation
(Berlin Museum website: Lebenslauf Rathgens). He treated three tablets in this way (Berlin, VA
1048,1050,2315);hedescribesthemasalreadyfired,thoughtwoofthemareatypeofUrIIItext
normally described as unfired, which suggests that he had as much trouble with this issue as
everyone else. Anyway he soaked them in hydrochloric acid and washed them in distilled water,
and they were clean. However, tablets are liable to contain a range of insoluble salts, whose
reactionstoacidsvary.SoakingwasnotatreatmentRathgenlaterrecommendedforunfiredtablets.
SimilarlyElisabethPackard(1939)oftheWaltersArtGallery,Baltimore,records:
amethodofcleaningaBabyloniantabletbyimmersioninadilutedsolutionofhydrochloricacid…The
calcium carbonate deposit is dissolved and the other kinds of incrustation are brushed off. The loose
fragments of the inscription are attachedwith a polyvinyl acetate solution and the impregnation of the
tabletbypolyvinylacetateconcludesthework.
Wearenottoldthelong-termresults.OntheotherhandwhenHarrySaggs,atRimahin1965,tried
placingencrustedfragmentsofunfiredtabletclayindifferentconcentrationsofacid,probablyboth
https://doi.org/10.1017/irq.2016.10 Published online by Cambridge University Press
182 JULIANEDGEWORTHREADE
hydrochloricandnitric,hewasdissatisfiedbytheresults;theonlyeffectthatIobserved,afteraweek
ortwo,wasthelossofafewscrapsofclay;muchoftheRimahencrustationwasprobablycalcium
sulphate(gypsum).
Packardalsoimpregnatedhertabletwithpolyvinylacetate.Whileitisnotoriousthatconsolidants
andothersubstanceswithunpredictableagingcharacteristicscanstoreuptroubleforartefacts,itis
doubtfulwhethertabletshavebeensignificantlydamagedinthisway.Thediscussioncontinues,and
the efficacy of ethyl silicate, that has been suggested for the treatment of tablets at the Musée du
Louvre, was one of the themes discussed during the British Museum 2015 seminar on tablet
conservation.
Since Herschel had identified salts as the cause of a long-term problem with the limestone
Egyptian stelas, although this related to exfoliation rather than crystalline deposits or visible
efflorescence, and had recommended their immersion in distilled water, perhaps Doubleday also
triedthis procedurewithtablets.Thefactthatthesoakingofharddryclaywouldeventuallyresult
in disintegration will not have been as obvious as may be supposed, especiallygiven the problems
discussed above in distinguishing between unfired clay, partly fired clay, and terracotta. Even
Flinders Petrie, an experienced archaeologist, in writing on the conservation of small antiquities,
was to claim that “any sort of material may be soaked” in water to remove salt: “bronzes, stone,
pottery,clothing,ivory,wood,painted objects,andevenunbakedclay,andpapersqueezes”(Petrie
1888:88).Rathgen(1898:72)wastoremarkthatPetrie’smethodwasimpossible.
Doubleday’sattemptstoconservetabletsbyfiringthemwereprescient.Iftabletsdisintegratedin
the process, this may have been because the temperature was raised or lowered too rapidly. In the
twentiethcenturyfiringbecamestandardpractice.
TreatmentoftabletsintheBritishMuseum,1860–1895:RobertReadyandSons,andthesecretReady
process
AmongthefrequentvisitorstotheDepartmentsofAntiquitiesatthistimewasAlbertWay…Hearingof
thedifficultyaboutcleaningthetablets,hetold[AugustusWallaston]Franksthathewassurethatacleaner
andrepairerofantiquitiesemployedbyhimcoulddowhatwaswanted,andaskedhimtolethimbringhis
protégétotheMuseumtolookatthetablets.ThiscleanerandrepairerwasRobertCooperWalpoleReady
(1811–1903),andasheunaidedsolvedallthedifficultiesinconnectionwiththecleaningandpreservationof
thetablets,itwillbewelltoputonrecordafewfactsaboutthisremarkableman…(Budge1925:149)
ReadywasdulyemployedbytheMuseuminJuly1859asapart-time“repairer”.Aftervariousother
workhe:
tookinhandseveralfragmentsofthebakedclaytabletsfromKuyunjik…andbysomemeans,whichhedid
notdivulge,hebroughtthembackclean,witheverycharacterlegible.Healsocleanedsuccessfullymany
unbaked Babylonian tablets, and found the way to remove from them the patches of hard crystalline
depositwithoutdamagingtheinscriptions.(Budge1925:152)
Ready’smostnotablesuccessinthisrespectwasin1872whenhecleanedtheKuyunjiktabletK
3375. One face of this, giving the Babylonian version of the Deluge, had been largely “covered
with a thick whitish lime-like deposit” (Budge 1925: 152), probably with a substantial gypsum
component. Deposits ofthis appearance are common onceramics excavatedin northern Iraq,and
are very inconvenient until one discovers that they readily crumble and flake away after a year or
so in storage there, exposed to the area’s extreme fluctuations of humidity and temperature. The
crumbling presumably results from differential expansion and contraction. Ready could easily
have devised a simple procedure on these lines, both heating and cooling the tablets, although it
doesnotseemtofeatureamongconservationpracticesinmodernhandbooks.AlternativelyReady
may have heated the tablets more strongly, as the museum did afterwards with a sand-bath
process. After this treatment he could have used fine tools, brushes and hydrochloric acid for final
cleaningasnecessary.
In keeping his methods secret, unlike Petrie, Ready was following a long-established tradition
amongskilledcraftsmen,andhedulypassedhisskillsontohissonsoneofwhom,TalbotReady:
https://doi.org/10.1017/irq.2016.10 Published online by Cambridge University Press
THEMANUFACTURE,EVALUATIONANDCONSERVATIONOFCLAYTABLETSINSCRIBEDINCUNEIFORM183
eachmonthrepairedacertainnumberoftablets,andcleanedothers,andrepairedbronzes,etc.Whenheleft
theMuseum,Ithinkin1884,nostepsweretakentoreplacehisservicestothisDept,andfromthattime,the
arrearsofworkhavesteadilyincreaseduntilatthepresentmomentsomethousandsoftabletswantcleaning,
stopping[?],andrepairing.MrAugustusReadyhasfromtimetotimecleanedtabletswhichwereurgently
neededfortheuseofstudents,butspeakinggenerallytheeffectsoftheservicesrenderedbyhimtothisDept
inayearareunappreciable…itseemstomethatsomeoneoughttobetaughttohelphimtocleantablets.
(Budge,3.10.1894;MiddleEastDepartment,Reports1890–96)
The urgency probably resulted from the decision in 1886 to publish a catalogue of the entire K
Collection,whenthe:
workwasmuchdelayedbecausemanyofthetablets…wereillegibleonaccountofthedepositwhichfilled
upthecharacters.Thedifficultyofgettingthetabletscleanedwasovercomeayearortwolater,whenthe
officialsoftheDepartmentfoundameansofcleaningthemforthemselves;andfromthattimethework
hasbeencarriedoutinasystematicmanner,tothegreatadvantageofallstudents.(Budge1925:155–56)
TheBritishMuseumsand-bathprocess,1895–1915
TheofficialBritishMuseummethodofcleaninginvolvedheatingtabletsinasand-bath.Thiswasa
substantial structure: “at the quarterly inspection of the fire apparatus, &c, on 9th April, Captain
Simonds examined and approved the building recently constructed on the Museum premises by
the Office of Works to serve as a sand-bath for the cleaning and preservation of Assyrian tablets”
(Trustees’Minutes,11May1895).Detailsofthecleaningprocessrecommendedmusthavebeenin
a report sent by Sir William Flower, then Director of the British Museum (Natural History),
presumably written by Lazarus Fletcher, Keeper of the Museum’s Mineralogical Department and
perhapsstillkeptsomewhereinthemuseumarchives.
Budge accordingly reported to the Trustees on 25.9.1895 (Middle East Department, Reports
1890–96):
Duringthelastfourmonthsfrequentusehasbeenmadeofthesand-bathwhichwasbuiltforthepurposeof
cleaningAssyrianandBabyloniantabletsintheearlypartofthisyear.Thetabletsofwhichthecleaninghas
been attempted are of three kinds: 1. Baked Assyrian tablets [plainly meaning items from the K
Collection]. 2. Baked Babylonian tablets. 3. Sundried Babylonian tablets. The methodswhich havebeen
employed in cleaning tablets are two: 1—with dilute hydrochloric acid, and 2—with sand heated to
about 300 degrees Fahrenheit [about 150° C]; only the latter has been employed in the Dept during the
lastfour months,andtheresultshavenotalwaysbeensuccessful.ThedirectionsgivenbySirW.Flower
have been most carefully followed, and it has been found that when tablets coated with gypsum are
insertedforatimeinsandheatedto300degreesFahrenheit,agreatdealofthecorrosioncanbebrushed
off. Much, however, remains embedded in the hollows of the cuneiform characters, and to dislodge it
fully the brush must be applied with considerable force. This treatment Mr Budge fears to apply to
unbakedtabletsofanydescription.
Informeryearslargenumbersoftablets,bothAssyrianandBabylonian,havebeencleanedbyacareful
useofdilutehydrochloricacid[surelyoneoftheReadytechniques],andacarefulexaminationofthetablets
which have been cleaned by this means convinces Mr Budge that they have suffered no injury, for any
lingeringtracesofacidhavebeenneutralisedbyammonia.MrBudgeasksforpermissiontouseacidin
caseswherebrushingis,inhisopinion,dangeroustothetablet.
Asupplementaryletterof1October1895fromFletcherstatedthat“thedepositonthetabletsisnot
whollygypsumandisnotthereforecompletelyremovedbyheatandbrushing. Hethereforethinks
thatacid,asproposedbyMrBudge,mustbeused”.
On 23.3.1896 Budge reported on the results of experiments made in the cleaning of Babylonian
tabletsbyuseofboththehotsand-bathandhydrochloricacid,andrecommendedthecontinuance
of this practice in preference to brushing. He does not seem to specify which tablets were being
cleaned or how they were chosen for cleaning; it must have been partly in response to demand
from visiting epigraphists, but there may also have been a more systematic arrangement. We then
have statistics for the numberof tablets cleaned eachyear, with related information (in the printed
BritishMuseumReturns,annualreportstoParliament):e.g.102cleanedintheyearendingMarch
1896, but 400 in 1896–97; 369 in 1899–1900; and 280 in 1909–10. In 1913–14 114 tablets were
cleanedbut3052werebrushed,presumablytoremoveefflorescencethathadbeenobserved.There
were 183 tablets cleaned in 1914–15, and 100 in 1915–16, but by 1917 the museum was being
https://doi.org/10.1017/irq.2016.10 Published online by Cambridge University Press
184 JULIANEDGEWORTHREADE
severelyaffectedbywartimemeasures,andtheprospectofair-raidspromptedtheremovalofsomeof
thecollectionstoaplaceofgreatersafety.
On12.1.1918(Trustees’Minutes)Budgerequested“furtherhelpinthepackingofAssyriantablets
forremoval”andtheTrusteessanctionedtheemploymentof“MrE.T.Steele,whohasbeenregularly
employed to write labels etc in the various departments” at a rate of 10 shillings a day. By April
instructions were being issued for staffon patrol in a nearby underground tunnel belonging to the
Post Office. A hygrometer was to be installed, and electric radiators were to be placed anywhere
that signs of dampness were observed. There are long lists of numbered boxes that were sent to
storagefromwhatwasthentheDepartmentofEgyptianandAssyrianAntiquities;manyprobably
contained tablets. I have not noticed any reference to tablets deteriorating because of damp in this
period, butother museum objects suffered considerably, which led tothe creationof the museum’s
Research Laboratory (Wilson 2002: 213). The process of bringing the tablet collection back to the
Department after the war lasted into 1920–21, and the programme of regular cleaning must have
lapsed.
TheArabhotashprocess,c.1870–1900
The treatment of tablets by heat, invented by Doubleday and refined by Ready and others at the
British Museum,wasindependentlydeveloped byanunidentified ArabinsouthernIraq, therenot
in order to clean tablets but to consolidate them. The principle was the same, but there was no
exacttemperaturecontrol.
Inthe1870speoplelivingin andaroundBabylonknewthatinscribed tabletshadacommercial
value,anditbecameworthwhiletoexcavateandsellthemthroughdealerssuchasYusufShemtob,
but condition was a problem. For instance Hormuzd Rassam, who had been deputed to get more
tabletsfortheBritishMuseum,reportedinDecember1880that:
the workmen come upon inscribed tablets almost daily. Unfortunately all the inscriptions found are on
unbakedclay,whichgetverymuchdamagedassoonastheyareexposedtotheair.Wehavelatelyfound
averylargetabletofthisdescription…whichhasalreadybeenverymuchdamaged;andmyfearisthat
ifitissenttoEnglandinitspresentstate,notasignoftheinscriptionwouldremainonitbythetimeit
reachestheBritishMuseum.ThereisanArabamongstourworkmenherewhohadbeeninthehabitof
findingthesekindofunbakedclaytabletsandwhohadtried,withsuccess,topreservethembybakingin
hot ashes. I am going toget him to tryone or two fragments before me, and if I find his process prove
successful I will have the large tablet baked in the same way before I send it home. (quoted by Reade
1986a:xxi)
Soon afterwards, at the nearby site of Abu Habba (Sippar), Rassam “discovered in different
chambersalargenumberofinscribedclaytablets;but,unfortunately,theywerenotbakedasthose
foundinAssyria;andtheclayofwhichtheyweremadehadbecomesofriablethatassoonasthey
wereexposedtotheairtheycrumbledtopieces.Ifoundthattheonlywaytopreservethemwasto
have them baked, which wedidwith success; but I regret to sayagreat number were destroyed by
the removal, as they were heaped up one upon another, and stuck together” (Rassam 1897: 406).
According to another description (Rassam to Layard, 28.2.1881: British Library, Layard papers,
kindlycopiedbyAlexandraFletcher):
Inanotherchamberwediscoveredabout500piecesofinscribedclaytabletssomewholeandsomebroken,
butasthesewereunbaked,andIfearedthatifIsentthemhomeinthestatetheywerefoundmostofthem
wouldgetdestroyedontheway,Ihadthemburntandnowtheylookquiteasgoodasthosewefoundalready
baked.TherearetwomenamongstourworkmenatBabylonwhohavebeenaccustomedtobakeallthe
unburntclaytabletswhichtheyusedtofindintheirBabyloniandiggings.
Budge,reportingonhisownfirstvisittoAbuHabbain1888,wrotethatinonemound“wereruins
ofhundredsofsmallchambers,andinallofthemunbakedtabletswerefound…Thenativesheated
hundreds of these in the fire in orderto harden them, but the result was that the hardened surface
separated itself from the body of the tablet, and broke into pieces” (Budge 1920: I, 316). The
British Museum holds thousands of tablets and fragments with a brownish grey or black surface
colour that must have resulted from what we may call the hot ash process. The museum website
has agood coloured illustration of this kind of effect on atablet from Babylonia (Rm 714: Reade
https://doi.org/10.1017/irq.2016.10 Published online by Cambridge University Press
THEMANUFACTURE,EVALUATIONANDCONSERVATIONOFCLAYTABLETSINSCRIBEDINCUNEIFORM185
2002b: 154, figs. 19–20); this tablet has on one side the image of apig in relief, darkened andwell
preservedexceptwhereanattempttocleanthestomachhasexposedsomehigh-qualityunfiredclay.
AnalternativeaccountofattemptingtoconservetabletsinsouthernIraqcomesfromthebrilliant
scholar Hermann Hilprecht (1903: 415–16), who was at Nippur during some of the 1889–1900
excavationsoftheUniversityofPennsylvania:
Asmostofthetabletsdiscoveredwereunbakedorbakedinsufficiently,theynotonlyarebadlybrokenand
chippedeverywhere,buttheyhavesufferedexceedinglyfromthehumidityofthesoilinwhichtheylay.In
manycasesthesaltsofnitrecontainedintheclayhadcrystallizedandcausedthegradualdisintegrationof
completedocuments,oratleast,theflakingoffoftheinscribedsurfaces.Frequentlytheycrumbledtodust
immediatelyaftertheirdiscoveryorsoonafterwards,ontheirwayfromNuffartoConstantinople.Theoften
advised baking of such tablets was not only useless, but proved repeatedly even most damaging, as it
accelerated the process of dissolution and hardened the dirt, filling the cuneiform characters to such a
degree that it could not be removed later. Thus far, none of the means generally recommended has
provedaneffectivepreservativefortabletsdoomedtodestructionlongbeforetheyarediscovered.
AstheNippurteamincluded,atleastin1889,“thirtytwotrainedworkmenfromJumjuma[Babylon]
andanothervillagenearEl-Birs[Borsippa]”(Hilprecht1903:303),whowillhavebeenaccustomedto
excavatingtabletsforsale,itislikelythattheycontributedtheirexperienceofthehotashprocess.
An incidental effect of this method of conservation, combined sometimeswith open storage on
museum shelves,is thelikelihood thatthesmoke fromthehot ashwill have leftfurtherdeposits of
calcium carbonate and other substances in or on the clay of some or all of the tablets treated in
this way. General air pollution, especially coal smoke, may also have left measurable traces:
certainlya fewobscureobjects, acquiredbythe British Museum in the nineteenth centuryand not
cleaned until the 1970s, retained then a distinctive thin layer of greasy soot, and even a faint
sweetish smell, reminiscent of London before the 1956 Clean Air Act. Pollution like this, and
comparable phenomena, need to be allowed for in the course of studies or analyses of types of
tabletclay.
FriedrichRathgenandtheintroductionofhigh-temperaturefiringinEuropeandtheUS,1900–1935
MeanwhileanothermethodoftreatingcuneiformtabletswasbeingdevelopedbyFriedrichRathgen
in Berlin. The first published description of his work may be a museum book on conservation
(Rathgen 1898: 72–73). Rathgen probably knew from epigraphists about the Arab and British
attempts to clean tablets by heating them, and proceeded to undertake his own experiments and
publish his results. After his initial work with hydrochloric acid noted above, Rathgen (1903;
1904), like Doubleday in the 1850s but with greater success, tried the more drastic step of
transforming unfired and poorly fired tablets from clay to terracotta. He did this by heating them
in a kiln to 600° C or more, far higher than the temperatures then approved for the British
Museumsand-bath.
Rathgen’sprocessissummarisedbyMarkGilberg(1987:112).Firstthetabletswerebaked“ina
mufflefurnaceheatedbybunsenburners”,thetemperaturebeingregulated“throughtheuseofSeger
Cones placed inside the furnace where they could be seen through the observation aperture”. This
removed much of the surface encrustation, and the tablets were then soaked in water, with the
long-termaimofpreventingfutureefflorescenceandsurfacedamage.Rathgen’stechniquewasthe
first to integrate the processes of cleaning, in order to make the tablets legible, and conservation,
inordertokeepthempermanentlystable.
DuringthisperiodtabletswerecomingtoBerlinfromextensiveGermanexcavationsatBabylon
and Ashur, and Rathgen was responsible for firing manyof them. I am indebted to Olof Pedersén
(pers. comm., 23.2.2015) for this information and to Hermann Hunger (pers. comm., 17.3.2015)
forthereminderofhowoftenscholarsworkingonAshurtextsremarkthatcleaningandfiringhas
enabledthemtoreadmorethanthefirsteditor.
Elsewherein Germany,asitthenwas,thereisanallusion (Anon.1913)tothefiring of400Old
Babylonian clay tablets belonging to the Strasbourg University library. An electric kiln was used.
It is not stated whether Rathgen’s recommendations on firing temperature were followed. There
are probably further records of what else was being done to tablets in various institutions before
https://doi.org/10.1017/irq.2016.10 Published online by Cambridge University Press
186 JULIANEDGEWORTHREADE
theFirstWorldWar.Theabsenceofrecordswouldnotmeanthatnothingwashappening.Atanyrate
theideathattabletsshouldbefiredorrefiredtoahightemperaturewasspreading.
MeanwhileintheUSsubstantialnumbersofcuneiformtabletswerebeingboughtbyindividuals
andinstitutions.Probablythemajoritywereinfairconditionandremainedso,sincethedealerswill
havelookedafterthemasbesttheycould,andthepurchaserswillhavepreferredthebetter-looking
pieces. The most substantial collection was at the University of Pennsylvania (Penn) Museum,
Philadelphia. This comprised many tablets excavated by the successive expeditions to Nippur, in
addition to those that had been purchased, and I am indebted to Aage Westenholz (pers. comm.,
16.3.2015) for further information on Hilprecht’s activities there. In 1906 Hilprecht was in charge
ofthecollection,andmadewhatseemstohavebeenhissecondexperimentinfiringtablets,buthe
then decided that the process changed their appearance to an intolerable degree. So that
experiment presumably involved firing at a high temperature, on the lines recommended by
Rathgen.Hilprechtinsteadhadglass-toppedboxesmadeforthetablets,asattheBritishMuseum,
whichitwashopedwouldpreservethemwellenough.
Probablythefirstuseofahigh-temperaturekilntofiretabletsinEnglandwasatOxford.Henry
Field(1929:7)states,withreferencetotheexcavationsinMoundWatKishin1923–24:
Numeroustabletsbearingsyllabariesandreligioustextswereuncovered;butsincemostofthetabletswere
unbaked,theywerenearlyalwaysinafragmentarycondition,andhadtobeexcavatedwiththegreatestcare
and skill. Professor Langdon used a solution of celluloid as a preservative for the broken fragments of
tablets,whichweredriedandbrushedbeforeshipmenttotheAshmoleanMuseumatOxford,wherethey
werebakedandcleaned.
Paul Collins, writing from the Ashmolean (pers. comm., 24.2.2015), points out that this may have
been regular practice with tablets from Kish, as in 1923 the museum workshop was “fittedwith a
gas muffle-oven, to enable the baking of clay tablets and other salt-corrupted objects” (Hogarth
1923:2),butthefiring temperatureisunknown.Morerecentrecordsshowthatnearlyeverytablet
intheAshmoleancollectionwasfiredto700°Cbetween1978and1980”.
Rathgen’sfinalrecommendationsonthetreatmentofcuneiformtabletswerepublishedinthethird
edition of his book, Die Konservierung von Altertumsfunden (Rathgen 1926: 89–103). He still
recommended firing to 600° C in most circumstances, or to a maximum of 950° C or 1050° C if
tabletswere particularlydifficult to clean. Once fired,tabletswere tobe soaked to remove residual
salts,andsurfacescouldbecleanedwithhydrochloricacid.
Soonafterwards,intheUSin1926–27,DrEttaleneM.Gricewasmakingherfirstattemptstousea
“specially constructed electric furnace” for firing the tablets of the Babylonian Collection of Yale
University(Parkinson1950:6).Shediedin1927,butParkinsonaddsthatthe“workwascontinuedby
ProfessorR.P.Dougherty,and,since1933,byProfessorStephens,whohasmadevariousrefinements
in the procedure”. The maximum temperature that Stephens quoted to Parkinson was 1400°F, i.e.
760° C, but the latter himself preferred a maximum of about 850°C. There were also various ideas
about the best methods of soaking to desalinate the tablets. In view of the timing, and of Grice’s
position at Yale, it seems highly probable that this tablet firing project began as another initiative of
thedynamicAlbertClay(Foster2006:65–68;2013),inspiredbyknowledgeofRathgen’swork.
HaroldPlenderleith’s1934book,ThePreservationofAntiquities,referredtoRathgen(1926)forits
descriptionofhowtoconservetablets.PlenderleithworkedattheBritishMuseumduring1924–59,
butIhavenotheardoftabletsbeingfiredthereintheinterwarperiod.
RathgenremainedinchargeofhislaboratoryinBerlinuntilretirementin1927.In1930,according
toJoachimOelsner(Westenholz,pers.comm.,16.3.2015),thoseNippurtabletsformingHilprecht’s
personalcollection,whichhadbecometheHilprecht-SammlungatJenaafterhisdeathin1925,were
fired in Berlin (though apparently not desalinated). Given the friendly relations between Germany
and Turkey, Rathgen’s laboratory was presumably also the model for a new one, complete with
facilities for drying, firing and soaking tablets, that was established in the Istanbul Museum in
1935 (Kraus 1947: 97–119). Firing began there in the autumn of 1937, and by November 1946
about 60,000 out of the 75,000 tablets and fragments in the collection (from Adab, Ashur,
Boghazköy, Kültepe, Kish, Telloh, Drehem, Abu Habba, Fara, Jokha and Warka) had been
https://doi.org/10.1017/irq.2016.10 Published online by Cambridge University Press
THEMANUFACTURE,EVALUATIONANDCONSERVATIONOFCLAYTABLETSINSCRIBEDINCUNEIFORM187
treated.AtsomestageakilnwasalsoestablishedinAnkara,asthatiswheretheSultantepetablets
werefiredin1953(GurneyandFinkelstein1957:iv).
LeonardWoolleyandthetreatmentoftabletsatUr,1919–1934
In1919theBritishMuseuminitiatedfreshexcavationsatUrinsouthernIraq,whichdulyproduced
tablets.Hall(1930:150,164–65,173)referstofindingbothbakedandunbakedvarietiesinthefirst
season,butheclearlyhadnotimetotreattheminthefield.Thenin1922LeonardWoolleybegan
work there, on behalf of the joint expedition of the British Museum and the University of
Pennsylvania Museum. Woolley, who could well have seen the British Museum sand-bath in
operation before the First World War and may have heard of Rathgen’s work, described his own
method of conserving tablets in one of his reports home (15.1.1923), preserved in the central
archive of the British Museum. I am indebted to Birger Helgestad for an extract and for drawing
myattentiontothephotographsinFigs.5and8:
Tabletscontinuetoturnupinconsiderablenumbers.Thesearealmostwithoutexceptionofunbakedclay,
and after their long burial in damp soil impregnatedwith salts they are generally in a lamentable state,
difficulttodistinguishfromthesurroundingearthandmoredifficulttoextractfromit,—thoughinthis
respect our workmen have developed an unexpected and gratifying skill. It is dangerous to handle and
impossibletocleanthem,astheclayissoftwhiledampandpowderywhendry,andtheywouldcertainly
decomposeiflefttothemselves.Ihavethereforeadoptedameansofdealingwiththemmoreelaborate,I
imagine, than has before been attempted in the field, but amply justified by its results. The tablets, as
found, are packed in tins in dry sand and baked in an improvised kiln heated by fuel oil. The majority
can, after this baking, be brushed clean and left; if necessary they are treated with hydrochloric acid.
Thosewhichwerebadlyflakedordisintegratedbysaltactionare,aftercarefulcleaning,joinedtogether
and solidified with celluloid solution. I send photographs of four tablets, taken at random, before and
after treatment; that labeled T.T.B. 17 illustrates the action of organic salts in an aggravated form, the
othersarenormalexamples.
Analternativeaccountderivesfromavisitor:
ThiswasanexcitingtimeoncemoreinUroftheChaldees,forundertheflooroftheTempleofNabonidus
theyhaddiscoveredtheoldhouseofthearchives.Itsroofwasflattenedrightdown,butbeneathwerestores
ofclaytablets,recordsofeverykindoftransactionofthatday.Astheyweremadeofsoftunbakedclayitwas
immenselydifficulttogetthemoutwithoutinjuringthem,andonlyspecialArabworkerswerepermittedto
attemptit.Theselayprostrateontheirfaces,flatontheground,usingasmallpenknife,and,withtheireyes
screweddownclosetotheirwork,theylookedlikeacrowdofmyopicbookworms.Everynowandthenone
wouldsignifyatrophyrecovered,whenthePennsylvanianexpert,DrLegrand[sic:actuallyLegrain],would
carryitoffandlayitgentlyonsandinasmalltincan,tobebakedimmediatelyanddecipheredatonce.
(Grenfellc.1929:116).
Theprocedurewasmuchthesame41yearslateratAbuSalabikh;Figs.6–7.
There are further details in a popular book first published in 1930 (Woolley 1937: 93–94, pls.
29–31):
AtUranylumpsofclaylookingliketabletsareliftedfromthegroundstillencasedintheircoveringofearth,
andarepackedinmetalboxesfilledwithcleansand;aftertheyhavebeenleftforafewdaystogivetheclaya
chancetodry,theboxesareputintoarough-and-readykilnuntilthekilnsarered-hotandtheclayisturned
toterracotta.Thenthetabletsaretakenout;theircolourmayhavealtered,whichmatterslittle,buttheyare
hardandstrong…
Woolleywasapparentlynotconcernedaboutdesalination.
Woolley’soil-firedkilnwasprobablythefirstofitskindspecificallyconstructedforfiringtabletsat
anarchaeologicalsite.Soonafterwards,however,hewasindebtedto“Mr.Bruce,oftheIraqrailways,
whowhenmylittlehomemadeovenprovedinadequatetothetaskundertookthefiringofalltablets
found”(Woolley1925:392).WhateveritwasthatBrucedid,aphotographfromthe1928–29season
showswhathasbynowbecomeanovenofconsiderablecharacter,withitssupplyofoilcomingfroma
barrelperchedontheroofoverlookingit,Fig.8.AndréParrot(1953:88),whomusthavevisitedmany
sitesduringhisownworkinIraqin1930–34,ifnotearlier,refersinonebreathtotheuseofafourau
mazout, an oil-fired kiln, both at Ur and at Tell Asmar, the Diyala site being dug by the Chicago
OrientalInstitute.
https://doi.org/10.1017/irq.2016.10 Published online by Cambridge University Press
188 JULIANEDGEWORTHREADE
Fig.5 TabletsbeforeandafterfiringandcleaningatUr,1923(Woolley1937:pl.XXXIa–b).Photographs:the
JointExpedition.
Fig.6 KhalifaMuhammad(?)ofSherqatcompletingexcavationofAbuSalabikhtablets,readyforremovalby
RobertBiggsandDianeE.Taylor,1965.Photograph:McGuireGibson
ThetemperaturereachedinthekilnsatUrmusthavevaried.AlthoughWoolleywroteofturning
tabletstoterracotta,UrtabletsnowintheBritishMuseumincludesomefromthe1929–30season,
with museum numbers in the range BM 128926–128961. They looked, at least on inspection in
March 2015, as if they might still be in the state in which they had arrived, softer than terracotta,
with grey-black surface colours much like those of tablets from Babylonia brought back by
Rassam orpurchasedin the 1870s–1890s.Manywill havebeen firedtoahigher temperaturemore
recently, but some of those at the University Museum may still be in the state in which they left
thesite,asErleLeichtyhasremarkedthattabletsfromUrweretheonlyonesinthecollectionthat
had not yet been fired when the kiln used for this purpose since the 1970s fell off a crane and
brokeafewyearsago.
https://doi.org/10.1017/irq.2016.10 Published online by Cambridge University Press
THEMANUFACTURE,EVALUATIONANDCONSERVATIONOFCLAYTABLETSINSCRIBEDINCUNEIFORM189
Fig.7 RobertBiggsinspectingAbuSalabikhtabletsafterfiring,1965.Photograph:McGuireGibson
Fig.8 “BakingclaytabletsatUr[1928–29season].Thetinsarebeingputinafurnaceheatedbyvaporisedoil
fromthereservoironthehouseroof”(Woolley1937:pl.XXX).Photograph:theJointExpedition
https://doi.org/10.1017/irq.2016.10 Published online by Cambridge University Press
190 JULIANEDGEWORTHREADE
Woolleyalsogaveadescriptionofhisrecordingsystemfortablets.Hedidthisaftersomeofthem
hadbeenpublished,tohismanifestannoyance,withnorecordoftheirprovenance,andhewishedto
emphasisethathehimselfhadnotbeenresponsiblefortheomission.
The tablets could not be given catalogue numbers [excavation U numbers] until they had been cleaned,
whichnearlyalwaysmeantuntiltheyhadbeenbaked;fieldnotesonthehousesthereforecouldgenerally
recordonlythefactoftheirdiscovery,theirwhereaboutsinthebuildingandtheapproximatenumberin
the hoard or room. For each isolated tablet, or for each hoard, the site symbol, the house number and
the room number were written on a paper which was kept with the specimen or specimens, and for
bakingthesamedetailswereincisedonpot-sherdsplacedwiththespecimensinthesand-box;whenthe
baked tablet had been cleaned its catalogue number was inscribed on it and the information on the
potsherdwascopiedontothecataloguecard.(WoolleyandMallowan1976:xviii)
SoWoolleywasfullyconsciousoftheimportance,notonlyofkeepingadequaterecordsoftablets
in the first place but of keeping the records safe. Delougaz (1933: 42–53) also emphasises the
importance of provenance records. Crawford (1966: 1–2) waswell aware of their vulnerability: “it
is so easy to lose a slip of paper or return a tablet to the wrong box or shelf”. This has been a
persistent problem, and firing is onlyone of theways of losing tablet numbers: thus the 1959.1117
group of tablets acquired by the British Museum from the widow of Chauncy Winckworth were
presumably from the Ur 1930–31 season (Winstone 1990: 185–87), but even this is not certain
unlessconfirmedbypublicationoftheircontents.
Thehigh-temperaturefiringoftabletsinthefield,1927–1949
The next kiln specifically designed to fire tablets at a high temperature in the field was the one
constructed for Edward Chiera in December 1927 at Nuzi (the Yorghan Tepe complex, including
ancientGasur).Itwasa“veryelaborateandbigcrudeoilburningoven”,builtfromancientbricks
(Richard Starr 1996: 24–26; Lacheman and Maidman 1989: frontispiece). The Nuzi expedition
was a joint project of Harvard University and the American Schools of Oriental Research. As
noted above, there was already a kiln at Yale, and the third edition of Rathgen’s book, Die
Konservierung von Altertumsfunden, had just appeared, recommending high-temperature firing.
Probably Chieragot the idea directlyor indirectly from Rathgen or Woolley. He does not seem to
havesoakedthetabletsafterfiring.
Many tablets had already appeared on the market from Nuzi before 1900 (Gadd 1926: 49–52).
They had probably not been fired in antiquity but were in reasonable condition, and Chiera did
not fire the tablets he himself excavated during his first official season in 1925. The condition of
particular groups of tablets, however, must have depended as always on circumstantial factors,
whichmadetheexistenceofthekilnconvenient.AsdescribedbyR.Starr(1996:25–26),thetablets:
weremadeofordinaryclaydriedinthesunandperfectlycapableofstandingallthehandlingthatprivate
documents,accounts,andrecordswouldget.Butwhenwedigthemoutofthegroundtheyaredampand
extremelyfragile;infacttheyoftencomeoutbadlybroken,sosomemeansmustbefoundtoputthemin
permanent form. Consequently we bake them; thus they become small inscribed bricks and almost
indestructible.
On the other hand another group found in 1927 consisted of “over 800 tablets almost all in perfect
condition”.
TheNuzikilnwasusedtofiretabletsonsiteduringalltheseasonsfrom1927till1931.Dorothy
Starr(1996:174–77)givesveryfulldetailsoftheprocess,asoperatedin1930.Shealsomentionsthat
“themodernpotteryofthisregionwillnotstandupundertheintenseheat”,andhow:
intheearlydays,whenthetechniqueofourfieryfurnacewasbeinginvestigated,onebatchoftabletshad
beencompletelymelted,alongwiththesurroundingjars,andfusedwiththeembeddingsand.Thattook
considerable heat. But nowadays we knew better, and the fire was carefully regulated and constantly
watchedbythefaithfulFathulla.
Overheating is an unavoidable danger with kilns; much of the 1989 archive from the North-West
PalaceatNimrudwaslostinthisway(MuayyadDamerji,pers.comm.,12.3.2002;AliYaseen2008).
https://doi.org/10.1017/irq.2016.10 Published online by Cambridge University Press
THEMANUFACTURE,EVALUATIONANDCONSERVATIONOFCLAYTABLETSINSCRIBEDINCUNEIFORM191
Fig.9 FiringatNippur,1965.RobertBiggscheckswhethertheglassinthepeepholeisbeginningtoclear,while
MuhammadJodahcheckswhethertheflameneedsfuel.Photograph:McGuireGibson
D.Starrmentionsa“tinywindowofglass”setintothedoorofthekiln,butshedoesnotseemto
mentiontheuseofcones,asemployedbyRathgen;theseweresurelynotavailableinthemarketin
Baghdad but could have been specially imported. While she does not say how Fathulla was
enabledtojudgetheinternaltemperature,wemayimagineasystemcomparablewiththeonelater
describedbyVaughnCrawford(1966:6)for measuringthetemperatureatNippur,Fig.9:
Atthefinalstagetheflamewillbeshootingoutthetopofthemetalpipe.Itisbesttoarriveatthisstageafter
darkwhenonecanobservetheflameseasily.Whenthetemperaturehasbecomehighenough,thecarbon
whichcoveredtheinsideoftheglassoverthepeepholewillburnoffaffordingaclearviewofthebowls,now
almostwhitehot,ontheinsideoftheoven.Assoonastheglassisclearenoughtoseethebowlsinsidethe
oven,shutthefireoff.Thisburningoffofthecarbonontheglasswastheonlypyrometerusedonthethree
Nippurovens.
Remarkably, the person who has come to be widely regarded, at least in the English-speaking
world,asthepioneeroftheconservationoftabletsbyfiringwasnotHormuzdRassam’sunnamed
Arab workman, nor Rassam himself, nor Hilprecht, Woolley, Bruce or Chiera, all of whom had
heatedorfiredtabletsinthefieldbefore1930,letaloneDoubleday,Ready,Budge,Rathgen,Grice
and Dougherty who had heated or fired tablets in museums, but Pinhas Delougaz, who had been
an assistant on the excavations at Nuzi in 1928–29. He must have seen tablets being fired there,
and in 1930–31 he constructed a kiln for the same purpose at Tell Asmar. The critical step taken
by Delougaz was to publish a pamphlet about the subject which was written in English and
becamethestandardworkofreference(Delougaz1933).AccordingtoCrawford(1966:1):
ThefirstbigstepforwardinprocessingclaytabletsinthefieldcameduringtheexcavationsoftheOriental
Institute of the University of Chicago in the Diyala region near Baghdad some thirty years ago. The
technique suggested then was the use of a simple furnace for thebaking of inscribed clay tabletson the
site of the excavation itself soon after they were unearthed. All American expeditions working in the
NearEastsincethattimehavecontinuedalongthelinessetforthbyDelougaz.
Delougaz’s pamphlet included clear illustrations and detailed practical instructions on the
excavation, conservation and recording of tablets, on the construction and operation of the kiln
itself,andonfinalcleaning sothatthetabletsshould belegible.He advocatedthemeasurementof
temperature by the use of cones, like Rathgen, but the firing of tablets at 1500–1600° C, a
temperature much higher than Rathgen’s. He adds, however, that “when baking valuable tablets it
is better not to reach the highest temperature”; this implies the recognition of some risk, without
specifyinghowheassessedvalue.Delougazdescribeshisprocedures,whichdonotincludesoaking
after firing, almost as if they were his own invention. The one group of people he does credit are
https://doi.org/10.1017/irq.2016.10 Published online by Cambridge University Press
192 JULIANEDGEWORTHREADE
the British troops who are said to have devised the method of combustion used in these kilns, by
droppingwaterontohotcrudeoil.
Parrot(1953:88),whoworkedatMariinSyriaandbeganfindingsubstantialnumbersoftabletsin
1935,alsofiredthemtoahightemperature.Hisarrangementwas“plussimple”thantheoneshehad
seenatUrandAsmar,butwasstillclaimedtogiveexcellentresults.Thetabletswereplacedflatin
petrol cans, in layers separated by sand. The canswere placed in a quadrangular furnace made of
ancient bricks, with brushwood as the fuel in a hearth underneath. The fire was kept going for
several hours. The tablets had been soft, but after cooling they were now hard as stone, “dures
comme la pierre”, ready to travel safely from Syria to France. Parrot too does not mention
desalination, which was probably not a pressing requirement. According to Lamia Al-Gailani
Werr(pers.comm.,2015),Muhammad AliMustafa,whenhewasdigging atTellHarmalandTell
al-Dhiba’i on the edge of Baghdad during 1945–49, would also pack tablets in petrol cans with
sandandfirethematthesite.Thefuelisunspecified,buttheproceduresoundssimilartoParrot’s.
IamgratefultoCécileMichel(pers.comm.,23.2.2015)forsummarizingwhatlaterhappenedto
theMaritablets.TheytravelledfirsttotheLouvre,thentoaLoirechateauduringtheSecondWorld
War,thenbacktotheLouvre,thentothebasementoftheCollègedeFrancebeforemovingtoRue
Geoffroy Lannier and Rue de la Perle, beforebeing sent back to Damascus some years ago. Also,
during the 1980s, the Mari team proceeded to firing (by arrangement with the Sèvres porcelain
factory), cleaning, joining and marking the tablets, aswell as to systematic photographic coverage
using the procedures introduced by David Owen. The Sèvres firing implies that some of Parrot’s
tabletsstillneededtreatment.
Thetreatmentoftabletsinthefield,1949–80
TheillustrationspublishedbyDelougazoftheTellAsmarkilnprovidedaconvenientmodelafterPenn
andChicagoresumedexcavationsatNippurin1948.Originally,asMacGibsonwrites(pers.comm.,
23.2.2015, 29.9.2015, 8.2.2016), the men operating the kiln and providing continuity were Abdullah
Sultan, whowas major domo of the Nippurdig-house, and a Sherqati who hadworked as aboy in
the Tell Asmar dig-house. There was a succession of epigraphists—Jacobsen, Steele, Goetze,
Crawford, Biggs. In 1964–65 Muhammad Jodah, a local man from the hamlet nearest to Nippur,
workedformonthswithBiggsandbecameanexpertintabletfiring,assistingotherepigraphistswho
camelater.Crawford(1966:2–7,pls.I–IV)eventuallyrevisedtheDelougazsystemandpublishedhis
own recommendations for kiln construction and organisation, again with detailed practical
instructions and illustrations. He did not have apyrometer, but measured by appearance, as quoted
above.“AtNippurtabletsfiredforthecorrectamountoftimeandattherighttemperaturecameout
of the sand pink in colour. Underfired tablets were a dirty grey; overfired tablets white or green”
(Crawford 1966: 6–7).In the 1970sGibsonat lastintroduced the practice, whentherewassufficient
time, of desalinating tablets by soaking after firing, before final repairs; this required distilledwater,
onlyobtainablefromBaghdad,anditcouldnotbedoneasthoroughlyasdesired.
Upto1966therehadbeenthreesuccessivekilnsatNippur.BobBiggshimselfaddedtoandrefined
theCrawfordfiringprocedure(pers.comm.,25.2.2015,29.9.2015).TabletswerealsotakenfromAbu
SalabikhforfiringatNippurin1963and1965;in1965Biggsbuiltasecondkiln(neartheoldShergati
houseandstoragesheds)sothathecouldfireeveryday.In1977anothernewkilnwasbuiltnearthe
Nippur dig-house, Fig. 10, where tablets and impressions were fired every season until foreign
archaeological work in Iraq was halted after Saddam’s invasion of Kuwait in 1990. Biggs also
builtakilnatal-Hibawherehebakedtabletsandsealingsin1968–69and1970–71.
Crawford(1966:7–9,pls.V–VII)advisedthat,afterbaking,cleaningshouldbecontinuedbyuseofa
sand-blastinggun,amethodinventedonsitein1951–52byHarryWhitney,ratherthanbytraditional
toolssuchasabrushandsharptool.CrawfordillustratesthegunbeingusedbyAlbrechtGoetze,and
GibsontellsmethatitcontinuedtobeusedatNippuruntiltheearly1970s,butitwasnotgreatlyneeded
becausetherewasnotthatmuchsurfacesalttoremove.BothCrawfordin1963andBiggsin1965used
the sand-blaster on some of the Abu Salabikh tablets, which were more thickly encrusted with salt
deposits, and Biggs againusedit on some ofthe tablets and sealings at al-Hiba. At Nippurthe gun
was “attached to the type of automobile tyre pump which uses the auto engine as its source of
https://doi.org/10.1017/irq.2016.10 Published online by Cambridge University Press
THEMANUFACTURE,EVALUATIONANDCONSERVATIONOFCLAYTABLETSINSCRIBEDINCUNEIFORM193
Fig.10 ConstructionofanewtabletkilnatNippur,1977.Fromlefttoright:JabbarNasr,expeditiondriver;
AbdaSadaAbid,alocalpickmanlaterpromotedtoforeman;professionalbuilderapplyingmudplaster.
Photograph:McGuireGibson
power”, but at al-Hiba it was “hooked up to the motor of one of the motorboats that were our
connectionstothetownofShatra”(Biggs,pers.comm.,29.9.2015).
TheGermansexpeditiontoWarka,incontrast,firedtabletsnotatthesitebutinanelectrickilnat
theirInstituteinBaghdad.ThisatleastiswhereHermannHungerrecallsfiringtabletsin1969(pers.
comm.,17.3.2015),andthesamekilnwasusedtofiresomeNuzitabletsbelongingtotheIraqMuseum.
MaxMallowanrenewedBritishexcavationsatNimrudin1949,andinduecoursebegantofind
tablets.AsdescribedbyDavidandJoanOates(2001:195),oneorbothofwhomwerepresentduring
allthe1952–62seasons:
byfarthemajorityofcuneiformtabletsatNimrudhavesurvivedintheiroriginalunbakedstate.Theseare
oftencrumbly,andfullofsalt,andarenoteasytoexcavateevenwiththetechniquesofmodernarchaeology.
Thesurfaces,moreover,areoftendamagedandextremelydifficulttocleanwithoutcausingfurtherloss.
TheBritishthereforebuiltakilnatNimrudin1952.Thedesignwasimprovisedbythedigarchitect,
JohnReid,forCyrilGadd,theBritishMuseumepigraphistwhohadjustvisitedNippurandseenthe
kiln there (Mallowan 1977: 282–83). No technical description seems available, but it was on the
eastern side of the dig-house; the chimney had to be rebuilt beforeit would draw properly. Agatha
Mallowan wrote a ballad, doggerel but informative, about the first successful firing. One verse
goes: “At dawn the Young Epigraphist/ Obediently did rise,/ Broke down the door and sorted out/
Tablets of every size/ Holding a pocket-handkerchief/ Before his smoke-grimed eyes”. In 1962 the
kilnwasnolongerinuse,andtabletsfromlaterexcavationswenttotheIraqMuseumforfiring.
GaddalsosawWhitney’ssand-blastingdeviceinuseatNippurin1952.“Thisclearlyinspired[him]
to adopt a similar sand-spraying method which he later demonstrated in a film taken by Agatha
Christie [Mallowan]”(McCall2008:68),cf.Fig.1.Similarly,Walker(2008:256)has“heardpeople
like Harry Saggs telling me of their weird andwonderful experienceswith the sand-blaster used to
cleanthetablets”atNimrud.Plenderleith(1956:321–23)recordedsoonafterwardsthat:
theold-fashionedmethodsofsurfacecleaningsuchaspickingwithaneedleortreatingthebakedtablets
with hydrochloric acid are now out of date for routine purposes, although they may still be useful on
occasion. These methods have been largely superseded by the sand-blasting technique… A useful
portableformoftheapparatushasbeendevisedintheBritishMuseumlaboratory.
He illustrates the apparatus, and it is presumably one made at Gadd’s request as avariant of the
Nippur model and taken to Nimrud, but I have not encountered any further record of its use
either there or in the British Museum itself. The method may have been discarded because of the
need for power and compressed air, and because poor control could easily have caused irreparable
damage.
The young epigraphist of Agatha’s Nimrud balladwasSaggs, who came to Rimah in 1965 and
built another kiln in open ground north of the temple, Fig. 11. I listened to long discussions of its
https://doi.org/10.1017/irq.2016.10 Published online by Cambridge University Press
194 JULIANEDGEWORTHREADE
Fig.11 AbandonedtabletkilnatRimah,1967,withtheOldBabyloniantemplemoundandziggurratbeyond.
Photograph:J.D.Hawkins
design,whichwasbasedontheNimrudorNippurkilnalthoughnodrawingsofeitherwereavailable,
butahighwindblewupduringthefirstexperimentalfiring,thetestclaywasvitrified,andthiskiln
wasneverusedagain.TherewasaplantofiresomeoftheRimahtabletsattheUniversityMuseum
(Oates1965:75),butitseemsthatultimatelytheywereallfiredandcleanedattheBritishMuseumor
atthe Iraq Museum (Sollberger1976:v). The Iraq Museum facilities for treating tabletswere fully
described by Ali Al-Naqshbandi (1973). He was using a maximum temperature of 1380° F, or
about 750° C, together with the customary cleaning and soaking procedures involving water,
hydrochloricacidandawoodentool.
Al-Naqshbandi adds that tablets were impregnated at the end with a solution of nitrocellulose
(cellulose nitrate); this is unlikely to have penetrated deeply but will have helped consolidate and
protect the surface. There are miscellaneous other records of the glues, adhesives or consolidants
used on tablets in the final stage of conservation in the field, Fig. 12. In the nineteenth century
therewasshellac (Budge 1925: 160), and since 1920 thereseem to havebeen about five substances
employed, whose identity is partly hidden behind brand-names. Woolley used “celluloid solution”
at Ur in 1923 (see above), and Field (1929: 7) mentions the use of celluloid at Kish. Leach and
Tait (2000: 245) refer back to Lucas (1932: 132), who cites a “dilute solution of celluloid” used to
strengthen Egyptian papyrus; they conclude that Lucas very probably meant “cellulose nitrate
adhesive”, and the same must have been the case at Ur and Kish. Delougaz (1933: 54–55) equally
recommendsasolution ofcelluloid, whichwas“easilyobtainedfrom waste photographic films, by
placing them in hot water and then scraping off the gelatin with a knife”; alternatively it was
“easilyprocurablereadyforuseundervariousnames(e.g.Ambroid)”.Delougazalsoexplainshow
to prepare and apply it. Among other substances whose use on tablets is mentioned in reports of
the period, paraffin wax and plasterof Paris areperennials, while in the 1930swehavespermaceti
wax from whales (Parrot 1953: 89) and polyvinyl acetate or PVA (Packard 1939). In the 1940s
there is Vinyl Seal (Parkinson 1950), in the 1950s and 1960s “a nitrocellulose adhesive such as
Durofix” (Plenderleith 1956: 323) or “acetone-solvent glues such as Duco Cement or Ambroid”
(Crawford 1966: 10), i.e. still cellulose nitrate, and polyvinyl acetate again (Dowman 1970: 65–68,
123), which is what we used as a consolidant for general use at Nimrud, Rimah and Taya in the
1960–70s. As an adhesive at Rimah and Taya we preferred the HMG brand of cellulose nitrate;
thetabletsdidnotrequireconsolidation.
Whilethispaperdoesnotcontinuethestoryoftablettreatmentinthefieldbeyondthe1970s,itis
desirabletomakeasingleexception.Thecomprehensiveaccount(Roaf2004)oftheexcavationand
firingoftheentirecontentsofajarofMiddleAssyriantabletsfoundin2000atGiricanoontheUpper
Tigrisshouldberequiredreadingforanyoneexpectingtoexcavatetabletsinfuture.
https://doi.org/10.1017/irq.2016.10 Published online by Cambridge University Press
THEMANUFACTURE,EVALUATIONANDCONSERVATIONOFCLAYTABLETSINSCRIBEDINCUNEIFORM195
Fig.12 Selmaal-RadhicompletingworkonAbuSalabikhtabletsatNippur,1965.Photograph:McGuire
Gibson
ThetreatmentoftabletsattheUniversityofPennsylvaniaMuseumandtheBritishMuseum,1945–80
Parkinson (1950) describes the treatment of tablets at the University Museum. His paper is an
impressive piece of work, outlining in three concise pages the procedures for firing tablets to his
own preferred temperature of 850° C, together with his ideas on the chemistry of desalination—
almost fifty years before the same theme was addressed by Thickett and Brookes (1998).
Parkinson’s study should have been a major contribution to understanding how tablets should or
could be conserved, but instead therewasyet anotherbreakin the transmission of knowledge and
experience.Hiskiln“wasquitetiny,andheldonlyafewtabletsatatime”(Guinanetal.1976:43),
so that the amount of work he could do was limited, and he published his paper in The Museum
News, a journal that is now difficult even to identify. I obtained a copy by the good offices of
Grant Frame at the University Museum (20.3.2015), which had published it, but he tells me of at
least three other US journals of the same name—from the Brooklyn Museum, the American
AssociationofMuseums(Washington),andamuseumattheUniversityofSouthDakota.
So the introduction in 1955 of a new firing programme for tablets at the British Museum was
almost a fresh departure. The principle was straightforward, as enunciated by Plenderleith, still
head of the Research Laboratory, which supervised the installation, in his standard book on
conservation (Plenderleith 1956: 320–21). “As it is impossible to judge by inspection what heat
treatment a cuneiform tablet has been given in antiquity, the first requirement is a controlled
rebaking of the old tablet in order to convert it into brick”. He had cited Rathgen (1926) in his
own 1934 book, and Gadd must have told him about the Nippur kiln in 1952, but the only
reference Plenderleith makes to previous work in his own brief account of the new British
Museum programme, where tablets were fired to 750° C, is to Delougaz (1933); he regarded the
latter’s advocacy of a final heating temperature as high as 1,500–1,600° C as “unnecessary and
undesirable”.
The background to the new British Museum programme is that, during the Second World War
(1939–45), many museum items were again stored away from the site (Wilson 2002: 249–51). I
have not located a list of which items were removed, but some of the departmental archives have
suffered water damage, which I was once told happened at this time, and tablets must have
travelled too. This accords with what is said in the obituary of Cyril Bateman, Senior
Conservation Officer in the department (Walker 2011): “part of the tablet collection had
deteriorated and had to be written off as a result of poor wartime storage conditions”. The term
“written off” is odd, as some tablets classified in this category, that are still kept in store, suffer
from severebut hardly terminal salt efflorescence. Bateman, whowas responsible for handling the
collections and musthavebeen wellaware of such issues,“came upwith the idea ofbaking tablets
https://doi.org/10.1017/irq.2016.10 Published online by Cambridge University Press
196 JULIANEDGEWORTHREADE
tostrengthenthemandsoakingtheminwatertoremovethedamagingsalts”.Theultimateintention
was apparently to fire the entire collection which now included, besides the nineteenth-century
tablets,manyfromexcavationsatUrandothersitesdugintheinterwarperiod.
The procedure now introduced at the British Museum was described in great detail by Robert
Organ (1961). An existing bathroom was converted to a workroom; the very fact that this
change was approved, at considerable inconvenience to female staff and visitors, indicates how
much importance was attached to the project (British Museum Trustees Minutes, 10.7.1954).
The tabletswere baked to 750° C, which was thought to be just above the minimum required to
ensure conversion of the clay to terracotta, with the least possible alteration in clay colour,
followed by soaking and/or brushing to remove recalcitrant salts. There is no mention of the
sand-blaster.Bateman(1966)repeatsmuchofthisinformation,giving700°Casthe temperature
at which the kiln should be switched off, and addsfurtherpractical guidance on procedures. The
original aim was to treat 10,000 tablets a year; the total after five years, limited by other
demands on the operator’s time, turned out to be 14,000. A few years later, according to
Bateman (1966: 12), the “small workshop is now set up on factory lines which enables one
techniciantodealwithasmanyas5,000tabletsayear”.Sollberger(1965:ix),withregardtoone
publication of Ur texts, states: “Mr Bateman has fired and treated the nails and tablets with his
usual skill, often turning a shapeless lump of clay into abeautiful cuneiform text”. The firing of
tablets at the museum continued in this way for many years, in the capable hands of Ken
Uprichardandothers.
Conclusionsandprospects
Layard’sinitial optimism overtheimportanceofclaytablets inscribed in cuneiform asartefacts of
historic importance was more than justified by experience. There have been persistent differences
of opinion, however, about how to treat them. It is broadly the case that archaeologists like their
tablets recorded, epigraphists like them legible, and conservators like them stable; collectors and
curators have any number of likes and dislikes. The priorities are not contradictory, but they are
divergent. Insistence on specialised agenda, without proper communication, has periodically
resultedinafailuretoseethewoodforthetrees.
For a long time it remained customary to distinguish between archaeological and epigraphic
studies as if they were independent fields of study, and to treat cuneiform tablets as if they were
plates in a book rather than artefacts in their own right. There are innumerable examples of
primary publications of tablets, where the handwriting and identity of the ancient scribe may be
significant, but all we can recognise is the style and identity of the modern copyist; where legal
contracts were once guaranteed with seal-impressions, but the cuneiform is published without the
seal-impressions, or the seal-impressions without the cuneiform; where the cuneiform is translated
in a code only comprehensible to specialists; where the shape of the copy is different from the
shape of the tablet; where we are not told the colour of the clay and whether it was fired in
antiquity; and so on and so forth. These features were common up to the mid-twentieth century,
and in some circles some of them persist. They can be understandable, but they mean that the
publicationsareinadequate,andthatsomeoneelsewillhavetolookatthetabletsagain.
Ontheotherhand,iftabletsaretreatedasartefacts,ifanalyticandtypologicalstudiesaredevoted
to their materials, methods of manufacture, ownership, usage, provenance and other elementary
characteristics,and ifthese resultsareintegratedwith theresults ofreadingthetexts,thenmoreof
the information embodied in the tablets becomes available to everyone. Problems are diminished
or eliminated, and specialists in distinct fields communicate in sometimes unexpectedly
constructiveways.Nowadaysthisiswidelybutstillnotuniversallyaccepted.
Thephysicaltreatmentoftabletshasfollowedapeculiartrajectory,withtheindependentevolution
ofseveralprocesses,pioneeredbyJohnDoubledayattheBritishMuseumbefore1855.Thepriority
was to make tablets legible, and perhaps to strengthen them. Robert Ready, who was active in the
British Museum from 1859 on, was the first person able to do this reliably, almost certainly
applying heat in some way, followed by hydrochloric acid. A process that involved heating tablets
in hot ash, so that they were fit for travel and sale, was invented by an anonymous Arab in the
https://doi.org/10.1017/irq.2016.10 Published online by Cambridge University Press
THEMANUFACTURE,EVALUATIONANDCONSERVATIONOFCLAYTABLETSINSCRIBEDINCUNEIFORM197
Babylon region in the 1860s or 70s. A comparable system of heating tablets in a sand-bath to a
temperatureof150°C,asrecommendedbyBritishMuseumscientists,wasofficiallyadoptedthere
during1895–1915.
Amoredrasticprocesswasdeveloped,throughaseriesofexperimentsbeginninginthe1890s,by
Friedrich Rathgen of the Royal Museums in Berlin. His purpose was not merely cleaning or
consolidation but long-term conservation. He heated tablets in a kiln to various temperatures,
eventually settling on 600° C as the best; this transformed clay to terracotta. He then used
hydrochloric acid to clean the tablets, and soaked them in distilledwater to remove residual salts.
Rathgen expounded his method in a series of publications in German. The final edition of his
majorbook,DieKonservierungvonAltertumsfunden,appearedin1926.
Similar methods,presumablybasedonRathgen’sthoughthisisnotusuallyacknowledged,were
adoptedatOxford(1923),Yale(1926),Istanbul(1935),theUniversityMuseum,Philadelphia(before
1950), the British Museum (1955), the Iraq Museum (1973), and doubtless elsewhere, perhaps
including Strasbourg (1913). In the field high-temperature firing for freshly excavated tablets was
introduced by Woolley at Ur (probably in or soon after 1922, certainly before 1930), and was
practised at Nuzi (from 1927), Asmar (from 1930), Mari (from 1935), Harmal and Dhiba’i (from
about 1945),Nippur (from1949),Nimrud(from1952),andal-Hiba (from1968).However,tablets
in the fieldwere not soaked to remove salts until Gibson introduced this practice at Nippur in the
1970s.AnotherNippurinnovation(1951)wastheuseofasand-blaster,insteadoftraditionaltools
like pins and brushes, for final cleaning of the surface of tablets, but this was not adopted as
extensivelyasonceexpected.
By 1970 there was abroad consensus about what should be done with most cuneiform tablets,
whether on excavations or in museums. Unless they were in excellent condition or were already
fired, they should be fired. Archaeologists, epigraphists, conservators and curators were generally
content, and the fact that firing turned a soft vulnerable lump of clay irreversibly into stable
terracotta was regarded as positive and advantageous. Nowadays this would still be widely
accepted. There is also, however, the alternative view that all conservation practices should be
reversible,andthatthefiringofanunfiredtablet,transforminganoriginalartefactintoasouvenir
ofitself,isnotmerelymistakenbutwrong.
Onethemebrieflymentionedabovehasbeenthepublicationofcuneiformtablets,whichhashad
as chequered a history as their conservation. The most appropriate methods of printing and
publication have been discussed interminably, but the advent of processes like three-dimensional
printingwillhopefullyrender manyofthediscussionsobsolete.
Thispaperhasdescribedsomeofwhathashappenedwithtabletsuptoabouttheyear1980.Itdoes
notpretendtobecomplete,asaproperstudyofthesubjectcouldfillalongbook.Thatwouldentail
checking innumerable other sources relating to the manufacture, use, burial, storage, excavation,
dispersal and publication of cuneiform tablets. There also exist published and unpublished
descriptions of the treatment of tablets at various archaeological sites and museums, which might
add significantly to the information collected here. There seems to be less information than might
be expected, however, as on the whole it has not been customary, at least for those studying the
ancient Middle East, to describe their ideas and practical procedures in anygreat detail. We have
thesameexperiencesoverandoveragain,andarerepeatedlyreinventingthewheel.
Bibliography
AliYaseen,Ahmad.2008.Thearchiveofapalacescribeandotherofficialsinthequeen’shouseholdfromthe
North-WestPalaceatKalhu(Nimrud).Pp.271–72inJohnE.Curtisetal.(eds.),NewLightonNimrud:
ProceedingsoftheNimrudConference11th–13thMarch2002.London(BritishInstitutefortheStudyof
Iraq;BritishMuseum).
Al-Naqshbandi,Ali.1973.TheIraqMuseumLaboratory,Baghdad.StudiesinConservation18:36–42.
Al-Rawi, Farouk N. H., and Andrew R. George. 1990. Tablets from the Sippar Library: II. Tablet II of the
BabylonianCreationEpic.Iraq52:149–57.
Anon.1913.Note.SprechsaalfürKeramik,Glas,Email,Silikate46:708.Coburg.
https://doi.org/10.1017/irq.2016.10 Published online by Cambridge University Press
198 JULIANEDGEWORTHREADE
Aruz, Joan, Kim Benzel, and Jean M. Evans (eds.). 2008. BeyondBabylon: Art, Trade andDiplomacy in the
SecondMillenniumB.C.NewYork(TheMetropolitanMuseumofArt);NewHaven/London(Yale
UniversityPress).
Bateman, Cyril A. 1966. The treatment of cuneiform tablets in the British Museum. Pp. 12–17 in Cyril, A.
Bateman et al., Preservation and Reproduction of Clay Tablets and the Conservation of Wall
Paintings.London(BernardQuaritch).
Bezold,Carl.1889–99.CatalogueoftheCuneiformTabletsintheKouyunjikCollectionoftheBritishMuseum.5
vols.London(BritishMuseum).
Biggs,RobertD.1974.InscriptionsfromTellAbuSalabikh(OrientalInstitutePublications,99).Chicago/London
(UniversityofChicagoPress).
Blackman,M.James.2003.Chemicalcharacterizationoftablets,sealingclays,andclaysourcesfromTellLeilan,
Syria. Pp. 455–69 in Elena Rova and Harvey Weiss (eds.), The Origins of North Mesopotamian
Civilization:Ninevite5Chronology,Economy,Society(Subartu,9).Turnhout(Brepols).
Borger,Rykle.1991.EinBriefSîn-idinnamsvonLarsaandenSonnengottsowieBemerkungenüber“Joins”und
das “Joinen”. Nachrichten der Akademie der Wissenschaften in Göttingen, I. Philologisch-historische
Klasse(1991,Nr.2):39–81.Göttingen(Vandenhoeck&Ruprecht).
Budge,ErnestAlfredThompsonWallis.1920.ByNileandTigris.2vols.London(JohnMurray).
——1925.TheRiseandProgressofAssyriology.London(MartinHopkinson).
Campbell Thompson, Reginald and Richard W. Hutchinson. 1929. A Century of Exploration at Nineveh.
London(Luzac).
CampbellThompson,Reginald,andMaxE.L.Mallowan,1933.TheBritishMuseumexcavationsatNineveh,
1931–32.AnnalsofArchaeologyandAnthropology20:71–186.
Cartwright,Caroline,andJonTaylor.2011.Investigatingtechnologicalandenvironmentalevidencefromplant
remainsandmolluscsincuneiformtablets.TheBritishMuseumTechnicalResearchBulletin5:67–72.
Crawford,VaughnE.1966.Processingclaytabletsinthefield.Pp.1–17inCyrilA.Batemanetal.,Preservation
andReproductionofClayTabletsandtheConservationofWallPaintings.London(BernardQuaritch).
Curtis,JohnE.,andJulianE.Reade(eds.).1995.ArtandEmpire:TreasuresfromAssyriaintheBritishMuseum.
London(BritishMuseumPress).
Dalley,Stephanie,ChristopherB.F.Walker,andJ.DavidHawkins.1976.TheOldBabylonianTabletsfromTellal
Rimah.London(BritishSchoolofArchaeologyinIraq).
Delougaz,Pinhas.1933.I.Plano-ConvexBricksandtheMethodsoftheirEmployment.II.TheTreatmentofClay
TabletsintheField(StudiesinAncientOrientalCivilization,7).Chicago(UniversityofChicagoPress).
Dowman,ElizabethA.1970.ConservationinFieldArchaeology.London(Methuen).
Eidem,Jesper.2002.Theclaytheywroteon—OldBabylonianlettersasartefacts.Pp.74–81inLamiaAl-Gailani
Werretal.(eds.),OfPotsandPlans:PapersontheArchaeologyofMesopotamiaandSyriapresentedto
DavidOatesinhonourofhis75thBirthday.London(Nabu).
Evans,SirArthur.1935.ThePalaceofMinos:aComparativeAccountoftheSuccessiveStagesoftheEarlyCretan
CivilizationasIllustratedbytheDiscoveriesatKnossos,Vol.4/2.London(Macmillan).
Fales,FrederickMario.1987.Neo-AssyriantextsandfragmentsfromCopenhagen.StateArchivesofAssyria
Bulletin1:18–25.
——2015.Editorial:twentyvolumesofNeo-Assyrianstudieslater…StateArchivesofAssyriaBulletin20:1–31.
Field,Henry.1929.TheFieldMuseum-OxfordUniversityExpeditiontoKish,Mesopotamia1923–1929.Chicago
(FieldMuseum).
Finkel,IrvingL.2013.TheCyrusCylinder:theBabylonianperspective.Pp.4–34inIrvingL.Finkel(ed.),The
Cyrus Cylinder: the King of Persia’s Proclamation from Ancient Babylon. London/New York (I.B.
TaurisinassociationwithTheIranHeritageFoundation).
Finkel,IrvingL.,andJonathanTaylor.2015.Cuneiform.London(BritishMuseum).
Foster,BenjaminR.2006.ThebeginningsofAssyriologyintheUnitedStates.Pp.44–73inStevenW.Holloway
(ed.),Orientalism,AssyriologyandtheBible.Sheffield(PhoenixPress).
—— 2013. Albert T. Clay and his Babylonian Collection. Pp. 121–35 in Billie Jean Collins and Piotr
Michalowski(eds.),BeyondHatti:aTributetoGarryBeckman.Atlanta(LockwoodPress).
Gadd,CyrilJ.1926.TabletsfromKirkuk.Revued’Assyriologieetd’ArchéologieOrientale23(2):49–161.
Gibson,McGuire.1972.Thearchaeologicalusesofcuneiformdocuments:patternsofoccupationatthecityof
Kish.Iraq34:113–23.
Gilberg, Mark. 1987. Friedrich Rathgen: the father of modern archaeological conservation. Journal of the
AmericanInstituteforConservation26(2):105–20.
Goren,Yuval,IsraelFinkelstein,andNadavNa’aman.2002.PetrographicinvestigationoftheAmarnatablets.
NearEasternArchaeology65:196–205.
Grayson,A.Kirk,andJamieNovotny.2014.TheRoyalInscriptionsofSennacherib,KingofAssyria(704–681
BC), Part 2 (The Royal Inscriptions of the Neo-Assyrian Period, 3/2). Winona Lake, Indiana
(Eisenbrauns).
https://doi.org/10.1017/irq.2016.10 Published online by Cambridge University Press
THEMANUFACTURE,EVALUATIONANDCONSERVATIONOFCLAYTABLETSINSCRIBEDINCUNEIFORM199
Grenfell,SirWilfredThomason.N.D.(c.1929).LabradorLooksattheOrient:NotesofTravelintheNearandin
theFarEast.London(Jarrolds).
Guinan,Ann,GaryOller,andDorothyOrmsby.1976.Nippurrebaked:theconservationofcuneiformtablets.
Expedition18/3:42–47.
Gurney,OliverR.1952.TheSultantepetablets:apreliminarynote.AnatolianStudies2:25–35.
Gurney, Oliver R., and J. J. Finkelstein. 1957. The Sultantepe Tablets, Vol. 1. London (British Institute of
ArchaeologyatAnkara).
Hall,HarryReginaldHolland.1930.ASeason’sWorkatUr.London(Methuen).
Heuzey,Léon.1912.LesconstructionsdeTellod’aprèslesfouillesd’ErnestdeSarzec:notescomplémentaires.
Pp.395–449inErnestdeSarzec,DécouvertesenChaldée(1884–1912).Paris(ErnestLeroux).
Hilprecht,HermannVolrath.1903.ExplorationsinBibleLandsduringtheNineteenthCentury.Edinburgh(T.&
T.Clark).
Hogarth,DavidGeorge.1923.ReportoftheKeeperoftheAshmoleanfortheyear1923.Pp.1–3inReportofthe
VisitorsoftheAshmoleanMuseumofArtandArchaeology,1923.Oxford(OxfordUniversityPress).
Hunger,Hermann.1970.DasArchivdesNabû-ušallim.BaghdaderMitteilungen5:193–304.
Jeyes,Ulla.2000.Gall-bladderomensextantinMiddleBabylonian,NinevehandSeleucidversions.Pp.345–73
inAndrewR.GeorgeandIrvingL.Finkel(eds.),Wisdom,GodsandLiterature.StudiesinAssyriology
inHonourofW.G.Lambert.WinonaLake,Indiana(Eisenbrauns).
Johns,ClaudeHermannWalter.1911.AListoftheYear-NamesUsedtoDatetheYearsoftheFirstDynastyof
Babylon…,PartI.Cambridge(A.P.Dixon).
Kelly,Amanda.2011.ANeo-AssyrianreliefintheWeingreenMuseumofBiblicalAntiquities,TrinityCollege
Dublin—acasestudyinartefactacquisition.ProceedingsoftheRoyalIrishAcademy112C:1–33.
King,LeonardW.1914.CatalogueoftheCuneiformTabletsintheKouyunjikCollectionoftheBritishMuseum:
Supplement.London(BritishMuseum).
Kraus,FritzRudolf.1947.DieIstanbulerTontafelsammlung.JournalofCuneiformStudies1:93–119.
Lacheman,ErnestR.,andMaynardP.Maidman.1989.JointExpeditionwiththeIraqMuseumatNuziVII:
Miscellaneous Texts (Studies in the Civilization and Culture of Nuzi and the Hurrians, 3). Winona
Lake,Indiana(Eisenbrauns).
Lambert,WilfredG.1957.ThreeunpublishedfragmentsoftheTukulti-NinurtaEpic.ArchivfürOrientforschung
18:38–51.
——1965.AMiddleAssyriantabletofincantations.Pp.283–88inHansG.GüterbockandThorkildJacobsen,
(eds.),StudiesinHonorofBennoLandsbergeronhisSeventy-FifthBirthdayApril211965(Assyriological
Studies,16).Chicago(OrientalInstitute).
—— 1992. Catalogue of the Cuneiform Tablets in the Kouyunjik Collection of the British Museum: Third
Supplement.London(BritishMuseumPress).
Lambert,WilfredG.,andAlanR.Millard.1966.CatalogueoftheCuneiformTabletsintheKouyunjikCollection
oftheBritishMuseum:SecondSupplement.London(BritishMuseum).
Layard,AustenHenry.1849.NinevehanditsRemains.2vols.London(JohnMurray).
——1853.DiscoveriesintheRuinsofNinevehandBabylon.London(JohnMurray).
Leach,Bridget,andJohnTait.2000.Papyrus.Pp.227–53inPaulT.NicholsonandIanShaw(eds.),Ancient
EgyptianMaterialsandTechnology.Cambridge(CambridgeUniversityPress).
Loftus,WilliamKennet.1857.TravelsandResearchesinChaldaeaandSusiana.London(JamesNisbet).
Lucas,Alfred.1932.Antiquities:theirRestorationandPreservation.London(EdwardArnold).
McCall,Henrietta.2008.MaxMallowanatNimrud.Pp. 65–72in JohnE.Curtis etal.(eds.),NewLighton
Nimrud:ProceedingsoftheNimrudConference11th–13thMarch2002.London(BritishInstitutefor
theStudyofIraq;BritishMuseum).
Maidman,MaynardP.1999.TheUniversityofChicagoNuzitexts:historyandprospects.Pp.25–34inDavidI.
OwenandGernotWilhelm(eds.),NuziatSeventy-Five(StudiesintheCivilizationandCultureofNuzi
andtheHurrians,10).Bethesda,Maryland(CDLPress).
Mallowan,MaxE.L.1947.ExcavationsatBrakandChagarBazar.Iraq9:1–259.
——1977.Mallowan’sMemoirs.London.
Millard,Alan.2005.Onlyfragmentsfromthepast:theroleofaccidentinourknowledgeoftheancientNear
East. Pp. 301–19 in Piotr Bienkowski, Christopher Mee, and Elizabeth Slate (eds.), Writing and
AncientNearEasternSociety:PapersinHonourofAlanR.Millard.NewYork/London(T.&T.Clark).
Moorey,P.RogerS.1994.AncientMesopotamianMaterialsandIndustries:theArchaeologicalEvidence.Oxford
(ClarendonPress).
Oates,David.1965.TheexcavationsatTellalRimah,1964.Iraq27:62–80.
——1970.TheexcavationsatTellalRimah,1968.Iraq32:1–26.
——1976.Introduction.Pp.ix–xviinStephanieDalley,ChristopherB.F.Walker,andJ.DavidHawkins,The
OldBabylonianTabletsfromTellalRimah.London(BritishSchoolofArchaeologyinIraq).
https://doi.org/10.1017/irq.2016.10 Published online by Cambridge University Press
200 JULIANEDGEWORTHREADE
Oates,David,andJoanOates.2001.Nimrud:anAssyrianImperialCityRevealed.London(BritishSchoolof
ArchaeologyinIraq).
Ochsenschlager, Edward L. 2004. Iraq’s Marsh Arabs in the Garden of Eden. Philadelphia (University of
PennsylvaniaPress).
Oppenheim,A.Leo.1960.ThecityofAssurin714BC.JournalofNearEasternStudies19:133–47.
Organ,RobertM.1961.Theconservationofcuneiformtablets.BritishMuseumQuarterly23:52–57.
Packard,Elisabeth.1939.ThecleaningofaBabyloniantablet.TechnicalStudiesintheFieldofFineArts8:90–97.
BCINabstractvidi.
Panayotov,StrahilV.,andCorneliaWunsch.2014.NewlightonGeorgeSmith’spurchaseoftheEgibiarchivein
1876fromtheNachlassMathewson.Pp.191–215inMarkhamJ.Geller(ed.),Melammu:TheAncient
WorldinanAgeofGlobalization.Berlin(MaxPlanckInstitutefortheHistoryofScience).
Parkinson,A.Eric.1950.Thepreservationofcuneiformtabletsbyheatingtoahightemperature.TheMuseum
News27(17):6–8.Philadelphia(UniversityMuseum).
Parrot,André.1953.Archéologiemésopotamienne:techniquesetproblèmes.Paris(AlbinMichel).
Petrie,Flinders.1888.Thetreatmentofsmallantiquities.TheArchaeologicalJournal44:85–89.
Pickworth,Diana.2005ExcavationsatNineveh:theHalziGate.Iraq67:295–316.
Plenderleith,HaroldJames.1934.ThePreservationofAntiquities.London(TheMuseumsAssociation).Non
vidi.
——1956.TheConservationofAntiquitiesandWorksofArt.1969reprint.London/NewYork/Toronto(Oxford
UniversityPress).
Rassam,Hormuzd.1897.AsshurandtheLandofNimrod…NewYork(Eaton&Mains)/Cincinnati(Curtis&
Jennings).
Rathgen,Friedrich.1898.DieKonservierungvonAltertumsfunder.Berlin(W.Spemann).
——1903.KonservierungbabylonischerTontafeln.Chemiker-Zeitung27:811.
——1904.Altertümerkonservierung.LexikondergesamtenTechnikundihrerHilfswissenschaften,Bd.1:156–59.
Stuttgart/Leipzig.Source:www.zeno.org.
—— 1926. Die Konservierung von Altertumsfunden: 1. Teil. Stein und Steinartige Stoffe (Handbücher der
StaatlicheMuseenzuBerlin).3rdedition.Berlin/Leipzig(WalterdeGruyter).
Reade,JulianE.1975.SourcesforSennacherib:theprisms.JournalofCuneiformStudies27:189–96.
——1986a.Introduction.Rassam’sBabylonianCollection:theexcavationsandthearchives.Pp.xii–xxxviin
Erle Leichty, Catalogue of the Babylonian Tablets in the British Museum, Vol. 6. London (British
MuseumPublications).
——1986b.ArchaeologyandtheKuyunjikarchives.Pp.213–22inKlaasR.Veenhof(ed.),CuneiformArchives
and Libraries (Publications de l’Institut historique-archéologique néerlandais de Stamboul, 57). Leiden
(NederlandsInstituutvoorhetNabijeOosten).
——1991.Mesopotamia.London(BritishMuseumPress).
—— 1992. An early Warka tablet. Pp. 177–79 in Barthel Hrouda et al. (eds.), Von Uruk nach Tuttul: eine
Festschrift für Eva Strommenger: Studien und Aufsätze von Kollegen und Freunden. München/Wien
(ProfilVerlag).
——1998.AssyrianSculpture.2ndedition.London(BritishMuseumPress).
——2000.Ninive(Nineveh).ReallexikonderAssyriologieundVorderasiatischenArchäologie9(5–6):388–433.
Berlin/NewYork(WalterdeGruyter).
——2002a.TheziggurratandtemplesofNimrud.Iraq64:135–216.
——2002b.Unfiredclay,models,and“sculptors’models”intheBritishMuseum.ArchivfürOrientforschung48–
49:147–64.
——2005.TheIshtarTempleatNineveh.Iraq67(=DominiqueCollonandAndrewGeorge,eds.,Nineveh,
PapersoftheXLIXeRencontreAssyriologiqueInternationale,London,7–11July2003,PartTwo):347–90.
——2008.Nineteenth-centuryNimrud:motivation,orientation,conservation.Pp.1–21inJohnE.Curtisetal.
(eds.), New Light on Nimrud: Proceedings of the Nimrud Conference 11th–13th March 2002. London
(BritishInstitutefortheStudyofIraq;BritishMuseum).
——2011.Retrospect:WallisBudge—fororagainst?Pp.444–63inMatthewIsmail,WallisBudge:Magicand
MummiesinLondonandCairo.Kilkerran(HardingeSimpole).
Roaf,Michael.2004.Theexcavationandconservationofthejarandthetablets.Pp.15–49inKarenRadner,Das
mittelassyrischeTontafelarchivvonGiricano/Dunnu-ša-Uzibi(Subartu,14).Turnhout(Brepols).
Saggs,HenryW.F.1968.TheTellalRimahtablets,1965.Iraq30:154–74.
—— 2001. The Nimrud Letters, 1952 (Cuneiform Texts From Nimrud, 5). London (British School of
ArchaeologyinIraq).
Schaeffer,F.-A.1929.LesfouillesdeMinet-el-BeidaetdeRasShamra(CampagneduPrintemps1929):Rapport
sommaire.Syria10:285–97.
Shaw,WendyM.K.2003.PossessorsandPossessed:Museums,Archaeology,andtheVisualizationofHistoryin
theLateOttomanEmpire.Berkeley/LosAngeles/London(UniversityofCaliforniaPress).
https://doi.org/10.1017/irq.2016.10 Published online by Cambridge University Press
THEMANUFACTURE,EVALUATIONANDCONSERVATIONOFCLAYTABLETSINSCRIBEDINCUNEIFORM201
Smith,George.1875.AssyrianDiscoveries;anAccountofExplorationsandDiscoveriesontheSiteofNineveh,
during1873and1874.London(SampsonLow,Marston,LowandSearle).
Sollberger,Edmond.1965.UrExcavationTexts,VIII:RoyalInscriptionsPartII.London(BritishMuseum).
——1976.Editor’sForeword.P.vinStephanieDalley,ChristopherB.F.WalkerandJ.DavidHawkins,TheOld
BabylonianTabletsfromTellalRimah.London(BritishSchoolofArchaeologyinIraq).
Starr,DorothyC.S.1996.NorthofBaghdad.Pp.127–238inDavidI.OwenandGernotWilhelm(eds.),Richard
F.S.StarrMemorialVolume(StudiesontheCivilizationandCultureofNuziandtheHurrians,8).
Bethesda,Maryland(CDLPress).
Starr,RichardF.S.1996.Lettersfromthefield,1927–1930.Pp.9–125inDavidI.OwenandGernotWilhelm
(eds.),RichardF.S.StarrMemorialVolume(StudiesontheCivilizationandCultureofNuziandthe
Hurrians,8).Bethesda,Maryland(CDLPress).
Stolper,MatthewW.2007.Kasrtexts:excavated,butnotinBerlin.Pp.241–81inMarthaT.Rothetal.(eds.),
Studies Presented to Robert D. Biggs, June 4, 2004 From the Workshop of the Chicago Assyrian
Dictionary,Vol.2(AssyriologicalStudies,27).Chicago(OrientalInstitute).
Tadmor, Hayim, and Shigeo Yamada. 2011. The Royal Inscriptions of Tiglath-pileser III (744–727 BC) and
Shalmaneser V (726–722 BC), Kings of Assyria (The Royal Inscriptions of the Neo-Assyrian
Period,1).WinonaLake,Indiana(Eisenbrauns).
Taylor,J.2011.Tabletsasartefacts,scribesasartisans.Pp.5–31inKarenRadnerandEleanorRobson(eds.),The
OxfordHandbookofCuneiformCulture.Oxford(OxfordUniversityPress).
Thickett,David,andSophieBrookes.1998.InvestigationofWhiteBloomFormedonCuneiformTabletsduring
Conservation (Conservation Research Group Reports, 1998/10). London (British Museum
DepartmentofConservation).
Veenhof,KlaasR.1986.Cuneiformarchives:anintroduction.Pp.1–36inKlaasR.Veenhof(ed.),Cuneiform
ArchivesandLibraries(PIHANS57).Leiden(NederlandsInstituutvoorhetNabijeOosten).
Walker,ChristopherB.F.1970.AfoundationinscriptionfromTellalRimah.Iraq32:27–30.
——1989.BM96573.In:BendtAlsterandC.B.F.Walker,“SomeliterarytextsintheBritishMuseum”.Pp.7–19
in Hermann Behrens et al. (eds.), DUMU-E2-DUB-BA-A: Studies in Honor of Åke W. Sjøberg.
Philadelphia(UniversityMuseum).
——2008.ThearchivesofNimrud.Pp.255–59inJohnE.Curtisetal.(eds.),NewLightonNimrud:Proceedings
oftheNimrudConference11th–13thMarch2002.London(BritishInstitutefortheStudyofIraq;British
Museum).
Walker,ChristopherB.F.2011.CyrilAlbertBateman(July8,1919–April25,2012).ArchivfürOrientforschung
52:389–90.
Wilson,DavidM.2002.TheBritishMuseum:aHistory.London(BritishMuseumPress).
Winstone,H.VictorF.1990.WoolleyofUr:theLifeofSirLeonardWoolley.London(Secker&Warburg).
Wiseman,DonaldJ.1968.TheTellalRimahtablets,1966.Iraq30:175–205.
Wiseman,DonaldJ.,andJeremyA.Black.1996.LiteraryTextsfromtheTempleofNabû(CuneiformTextsfrom
Nimrud,4).London(BritishSchoolofArchaeologyinIraq).
Woolley,CharlesLeonard.1925.TheexcavationsatUr,1924–1925.TheAntiquaries’Journal5:347–402.
——1937.DiggingupthePast.Firstpublished1930.Harmondsworth(PenguinBooks).
Woolley,CharlesLeonard,andMaxE.L.Mallowan.1976.UrExcavations,VII:TheOldBabylonianPeriod.
London(BritishMuseum).
Yi-Feng, Yao, Xiao Li, Hong-En Jiang, David K. Ferguson, Francis Hueber, Ruby Ghosh, Subir Bera and
Cheng-Sen Li. 2012. Pollens and phytoliths from fired ancient potsherds as potential indicators for
deciphering past vegetation and climate in Turpan, Xinjiang, NWChina. PLOS ONE 7 (6): DOI:
10.1371/journal.pone.0039780.
https://doi.org/10.1017/irq.2016.10 Published online by Cambridge University Press
202 JULIANEDGEWORTHREADE
JulianEdgeworthReade,
AffiliatedProfessorofNearEasternArchaeology,
DepartmentofCross-CulturalandRegionalStudies,
FacultyofHumanities,
UniversityofCopenhagen
julianreade@gmail.com
ﺔﻳﺪﻴﻠﻘﺗ ﻝﻮﻠﺣﻭ ﻞﻛﺎﺸﻣ :ﺔﻳﺭﺎﻤﺴﻤﻟﺍ ﺔﻴﻨﻴﻄﻟﺍ ﻢﻗﺮﻟﺍ ﺔﺠﻟﺎﻌﻣﻭ ﻢﻴﻴﻘﺗ
ﺪﻳﺭﺛﺭﺍﻮﺟﺪﻳﺃﻥﺎﻴﻟﻮﺟ:ﻢﻠﻘﺑ
ﺔﻳﺮﺛﻷﺍ ﻊﻄﻘﻟﺍ ﻦﻋ ﻢﻗﺮﻟﺍ ﻩﺬﻫ ﺖﻗﺮﺘﻓﺍ ﺎﻣ ﺎﺒﻟﺎﻏ ﻦﻜﻟﻭ ،ﺔﻴﻨﻴﻄﻟﺍ ﻢﻗﺮﻟﺍ ﻰﻠﻋ ﺔﻇﻮﻔﺤﻤﻟﺍ ﺕﺎﺑﺎﺘﻜﻟﺍ ﻰﻠﻋ ﺎﺳﺎﺳﺃ ﺪﻨﺘﺴﻳ ﻂﺳﻭﻷﺍ ﻕﺮﺸﻟﺍ ﺦﻳﺭﺎﺗ ﻦﻋ ﺔﻓﺮﻌﻤﻟﺍ
ﻡ 1850 ﻡﺎﻋ ﺎﻬﻟ ﻝﻭﻷﺍ ﻑﺎﺸﺘﻛﻹﺍ ﺬﻨﻣ ﺔﻴﻨﻴﻄﻟﺍ ﻢﻗﺮﻟﺍ ﻢﻴﻴﻘﺗﻭ ﻊﻳﺯﻮﺗﻭ ﺔﺠﻟﺎﻌﻣ ﺔﻟﺎﻘﻤﻟﺍ ﻩﺬﻫ ﺶﻗﺎﻨﺗ .ﺔﻤﻈﻨﻣ ﺮﻴﻏ ﺐﻗﺍﻮﻋ ﻰﻟﺍ ﻯﺩﺃ ﺎﻤﻣ ﻯﺮﺧﻷﺍ
ﻲﻓﻭ ﺕﻻﺎﺤﺑ ﺎﻬﻴﻠﻋ ﺮﺜﻋ ﺪﻗ ﻪﻧﺄﺑ ﺎﻤﻠﻋ ﺎﻬﻠﻴﺠﺴﺗﻭ ﺎﻬﻴﻠﻋ ﺔﻈﻓﺎﺤﻤﻟﺍ ﺕﺎﻳﺪﺤﺗﻭ ﺎﻬﺘﻋﺎﻨﺻ ﻕﺮﻃﻭ ﺎﻬﻨﻴﻃ ﺭﺩﺎﺼﻣ ﺪﻳﺪﺤﺗ ﻲﻓ ﺔﻠﻤﺘﺤﻤﻟﺍ ﺎﻳﺍﺰﻤﻟﺍﻭ ﻞﻛﺎﺸﻤﻟﺍﻭ
ﻒﺤﺘﻤﻟﺍ ﻲﻓ ﺕﺮﺟ ﻲﺘﻟﺍ ﺔﻴﻨﻴﻄﻟﺍ ﻢﻗﺮﻟﺍ ﺮﺨﻓ ﻲﻓ ﻰﻟﻭﻷﺍ ﺏﺭﺎﺠﺘﻟﺍ ﺪﻌﺑ .ﻠﻳﻮﻄﻟﺍ ﻯﺪﻤﻟﺍ ﻰﻠﻋ ﺎﻬﻴﻠﻋ ﻅﺎﻔﺤﻟﺍﻭ ﺎﻬﻔﻴﻈﻨﺗ ﻕﺮﻃ ﻚﻟﺬﻛﻭ ﺔﻔﻠﺘﺨﻣ ﻊﻗﺍﻮﻣ
ﻦﻜﻳ ﻢﻠﻓ ﻲﺠﻳﺭﺪﺗ ﻞﻜﺸﺑ ﺎﻴﺋﺪﺒﻣ ﻕﺮﻄﻟﺍ ﻩﺬﻫ ﻞﺒﻘﺗ ﻢﻏﺭ .1900 ﻡﺎﻋ ﻲﻟﺍﻮﺣ ﻦﻴﻟﺮﺑ ﻲﻓ ﺔﻤﻈﺘﻨﻤﻟﺍ ﻦﺠﺛﺍﺭ ﻚﻳﺭﺪﻳﺮﻓ ﻝﺎﻤﻋﺃ ﺕﺀﺎﺟ ﻞﺑﺎﺑ ﻲﻓﻭ ﻲﻧﺎﻄﻳﺮﺒﻟﺍ
ﺍﺬﻫ ﻲﻓ ﻕﺮﻄﻟﺍ ﻞﻀﻓﺃ ﻝﻮﺣ ﺍﺮﺋﺍﺩ ﺭﺍﻮﺤﻟﺍ ﻝﺍﺰﻳ ﻻﻭ .ﻜﻟﺫ ﺀﺍﺮﺟ ﻯﺮﺧﺃ ﺔﻠﻘﺘﺴﻣ ﻕﺮﻃ ﺕﺎﺸﻧ ﻚﻟﺬﻟ ،ﻦﻴﺼﺘﺨﻤﻟﺍ ﻦﻴﺑ ﻝﺎﺼﺗﻹﺍ ﻦﻣ ﻞﻴﻠﻘﻟﺍ ﻻّ ﺍ ﻙﺎﻨﻫ
.ﻟﺎﺠﻤﻟﺍ
https://doi.org/10.1017/irq.2016.10 Published online by Cambridge University Press

# FIGURE

# BIBLIOGRAPHY

