# METADATA
Author: Michel C.
Title: Central Anatolia in the Nineteenth and Eighteenth Centuries BC
Year: 
Source_ID: Michel0000_CentralAna
Source_Type: Article in Book: 
Source_Role,Step_distance: 2 ,3,4 
Pages: 111-136
Web:  

# TEXT

Cécile Michel*
Central Anatolia in the Nineteenth and Eighteenth Centuries BC
At the beginning of the second millennium BC, certain sites in central Anatolia, such as
Ac˛emhöyük and Kültepe, underwent considerable changes and attracted Assyrian mer-
chants from the southeast. These sites have been excavated for several decades now. They
have yielded abundant findings and have allowed us to better understand the environment
and material culture of the societies indigenous to the region. The earliest written sources
discovered in Anatolia are foreign: they belong to the archives of merchants from Asˇsˇur,
who settled at the city of Kanisˇ in the 19th and 18th centuries BC. Kanisˇ, whose modern
name is Kültepe, is located nearby the modern city of Kayseri. Although these documents
record the traderelations between Assyrians and Anatolians, they also indirectly document
the political organization of Anatolia and its constituent states. To reconstruct the history of
a region based primarily on foreign sources necessarily limits the results: we are restricted
to those areas of activity, within which the Assyrian merchants operated, and even within
these areas, we get a very partial and fragmentary account of events. For example, the As-
syrians never named the rulers of the different city-states that they resided in. Fortunately,
the few surviving archives belonging to Anatolians offer a more detailed account.
The period on which this article focuses is several centuries earlier than the founding
of the Mittani state; in examining this era we would be hard pressed to learn, from the Ana-
tolian point of view, something about the state’s origins or the circumstances of its rise to
power. This study aims instead to paint a picture of the history and organization of Anatolia
in the first centuries of the second millenium BC. A synoptic description of the Anatolian
region and its resources during this period will permit us to better understand the political
and economic organization of the small Anatolian states and to better analyze the different
conflicts that set them against one another during the period documented in the Old Assy-
rian archives. In theka¯rum of Kanisˇ, the Assyrians interacted regularly with Anatolians as
well as other foreign merchants, including the Hurrians, who would later found the state of
Mittani.
* Director of Research at the CNRS, ArScAn-Histoire et archéologie de l’Orient cunéiforme, Maison René-
Ginouvès, Archéologie et Ethnologie, Nanterre.
CENTRAL ANATOLIA IN THE NINETEENTH AND EIGHTEENTH CENTURIES BC 111
1 Anatolia and its resources at the beginning of the second millenium
Hundreds of sites dating to the Bronze Age have been excavated in Anatolia. Nevertheless,
only three sites from the Middle Bronze are known by their ancient names: Kültepe, in
ancient times called Kanisˇ, Bog˘azköy, formerly Hattusˇ(a), and Ali¸sar, which seems to have
once been known as Amkuwa.1 Although some sites, like Kültepe, have been excavated for
over half a century, there have been, until now, very few attempts at a scholarly synthesis of
the findings. Our understanding of material culture, society, and the political organization
of sites in Anatolia regularly improves, as does our knowledge of the chronological context
of archaeological finds. The development of different sites and their importance was di-
rectly linked to their geographic location.
1.1 The Anatolian space
Anatolia consists of a central plateau with clay deposits that was shaped by numerous vol-
canic formations and lacustrine depressions, bordered to the north and south by mountain
ranges. The Asian peninsula of Turkey encompasses several geographic zones, all of which
were more or less populated during the Middle Bronze Age in the first half of the second
millennium BC.2
To the north of the Anatolian plateau, the region bordering the Black Sea, there are
large areas covered by woods and rich deposits of copper and silver, especially in the Pontic
chain to the east. In this area there are relatively few urban centers that date to the Bronze
Age, with the exception of the plain between the Kızılırmak and the Ye¸silırmak.3 In the
West, there are also only a few major sites inhabited during this time period (see below).
The Anatolian plateau takes up the major part of the Asian peninsula of Turkey. The
Kızılırmak flows through its central part, which was densely populated during the Bronze
Age; the river serves as a natural border. The most important sites of the Middle Bronze age
were located in the fertile plane nestled along river bends. To the west of the Kızılırmak, the
soil is drier and there are fewer inhabited sites. To the southwest, in the irrigated plane of
Konya there were also fewer settlements, mainly inhabited by farmers and shepherds. To
the southeast of the Kızılırmak, in the plane of Kayseri, Kültepe was the most important
among a number of settlements that were occupied during the Middle Bronze age.4
The long range of the Taurus Mountains also forms a natural border between the Anat-
olian plateau and Cilicia to the south, as well as the Arab plateau to the southeast.5 The
1 Michel 2008a.
2 Yakar 2000.
3 Dönmez– Beyazıt 2008.
4 Yakar 2000; Sagona– Zimansky 2009, 225–252; Barjamovic 2011.
5 Marro 2004.
112 CÉCILE MICHEL
plains of Göksun, Elazıg˘ and Elbistan, irrigated by numerous waterways, contain a concen-
tration of smaller Bronze Age sites; these villages, inhabited by farmers, seem to have been
oriented toward the Euphrates rather than toward Central Anatolia. The Assyrian caravans
coming from Mesopotamia had to cross the Taurus at one of the few mountain passes, but
they also had to travel through very densely forested land. To the southeast of the Taurus,
the Euphrates constituted an additional natural border.6 The cities situated on the other
side of the river, although strictly speaking not a part of Anatolia, nevertheless participated
in the Assyrian trade network, even though the major commercial exchanges only occurred
once the Euphrates had been crossed.
1.2 Transportation in Anatolia
The Anatolian plateau itself did not pose any major problems for the transportation of per-
sons and goods; the areas close to the mountain ranges and rivers, however, were difficult to
access and to cross. The waterways, depending on their size, depth, and the rapidity of their
currents, were either crossed at a ford or with the help of a ferry or a bridge; one group of
texts records the costs of using various river crossings.7 Guarded toll bridges spanned
smaller streams, while travelers who crossed the Euphrates had to use ferries or small boats
that were put at their disposal.8 Travelling through the arid steppes and mountain ranges
posed other problems that were potentially dangerous to men, animals and the goods they
were transporting, and thus certain precautions had to be taken. Accounts recording the
employment of carriers and the renting of beasts of burden indicate that crossing the
mountains was costly and difficult. Additional men had to be hired to protect against the
bands of thieves that plied their trade in the mountains, stealing from and sometimes kill-
ing the passing merchants.9 The trade agreements concluded between the Anatolian rulers
and the Assyrians defined waterways and mountains as dangerous areas. A treaty signed
between the Assyrians and the Anatolian authorities of Hahhum, a city on the Euphrates,
addresses losses on the river itself, in the surrounding mountains, and anywhere within the
lands of the local sovereign.10 Crossing the Anti-Taurus and Taurus was especially perilous
for caravans coming from Asˇsˇur.11
The Anatolian climate, continental in nature, featured hot and dry summers con-
trasted with cold winters and heavy drifts of snow until well into springtime. These climatic
variations impacted the movement of caravans, imposing a hiatus on long-distance com-
6 Veenhof 2008b; Barjamovic 2011.
7 Veenhof 2006 et 2008b; Michel 2008b.
8 Veenhof 2008b.
9 Michel 2008b, 372f., 380–384.
10 Kt 00/k 10:ii 11–18,ka¯rum Ib, cf. Veenhof 2008a, 194–200.
11 Forlanini 2006.
CENTRAL ANATOLIA IN THE NINETEENTH AND EIGHTEENTH CENTURIES BC 113
mercial activity in winter, as the routes through the mountains became inaccessible due to
snow and storms. In fact, allusions to interruptions in travel due to freezing temperatures
and closed roads during the cold season are common in the surviving documentation. Even
though forests covered much of the Anatolian plateau, merchants were forced to travel
through desert-like areas during the dry season and therefore had to choose their itineraries
based on sources of water and places where they could re-provision. The journey was di-
vided into several stages, with breaks at inns, where people and animals alike could rest.
Caravan accounts included fees for inns, totaling several shekels of silver or tin or several
minas of copper; other expenses included fodder and rent for stables for the donkeys as well
as lodging and food for the merchants. A salary was sometimes added for the guards.12
Thus, the regular passage of large caravans played an important role in local economies.
1.3 The resources of the Anatolian states
The Anatolian plateau was largely covered by forests, but a sizable portion of the region con-
sisted of arable land and pastures. Farming and breeding livestock were the principle activ-
ities of the small Anatolian states. The past several years have seen an increase in archaeo-
botanical studies for various excavations of smaller sites in Anatolia, yet such studies are
beginning for larger cities like Kültepe and Acemhöyük. Research carried out on the botan-
ical remains at Kaman Kalehöyük, however, reveals the presence of no less than half a
dozen varieties of grain. According to the textual evidence, the majority of non-irrigated
fields were devoted to the cultivation of barley and wheat. The fields were alternately culti-
vated and allowed to lay fallow.13 The many loan contracts that were made out to the Anat-
olians provide a good documentation of the ancient agricultural calendar.14 Wheat was
sown in autumn (era¯sˇum, “to work” and “to sow”), barley in the spring. Once the grain had
ripened (kubur uttitim, from July to October), the grain was harvested with sickles (sibit nig-
˙˙ ·
gallim, esa¯dum “to harvest”), after which it was taken to the threshing floor (adrum). Finally,
·
the grain was sold in sacks at the market, or stored in large jars in the palace warehouses.
The Anatolians also cultivated sesame in order to make oil for food, perfume, and light.
In this period, land was owned either by farmers or by palace officials. Parts of the cul-
tivated land were under the direct control of the palace itself. The urban population and the
merchants of the ka¯rum, meanwhile, lived on the surplus agricultural goods sold at the
markets.15 This surplus also provided the funds for hiring men and animals for the cara-
vans and paid for their re-provisioning at the roadside inns across the plateau. Certain fields
12 Michel 2008b, 377, n. 25, text TC3 165.
13 Michel 1997; Fairbairn 2006; Fairbairn et al. 2007; Dercksen 2008b.
14 Michel 1997; Dercksen 2008b; Veenhof 2008a, 234–245.
15 Dercksen 2008a.
114 CÉCILE MICHEL
were tied to the palace by a service obligation (tuzinnum) whereas other domains (uba¯din-
num) were given to high officials by the king.16 Landowners were required to give a portion
of their harvests to the palace as a kind of tax. According to Yakar (1998), the communities
that were established on the semi-arid plateau in the area around Kanisˇ had a largely self-
sufficient agricultural economy. Nevertheless, the poorest farmers produced barely enough
food for survival; they were often obliged to borrow grain in order to get by until the next
harvest. They frequently mortgaged their lands against these debts.
Irrigated farmland was used by both the palace and individual landowners for the cul-
tivation of fruit trees, vegetables, lentils, chickpeas, onions, leeks, aromatic plants, spices
and animal fodder (in particular, vetch).17 Commoners also paid a fee for the use of irrigated
water.18 Olive picking took place in autumn (serdum). To the north of Kanisˇ, grapes were
also cultivated; the harvest took place in September (qitip kera¯nim).
Sheep and goat were allowed to graze the steppe and fallow fields. These herds were
usually owned by the palace and were raised for meat, fat, milk, and wool. The sheep were
plucked in the spring and the palace sold their wool in large quantities to the Assyrian mer-
chants, who played the role of intermediaries in its trade;19 the wool produced at Mamma
and Luhusaddia was particularly valued.20 The palace also raised mules, horses, oxen and
dogs.21 Excavations of the kitchens at the palace of Ac˛emhöyük have revealed the remains of
sheep and goats, but also of oxen and pigs.22 Commoners, meanwhile, often raised a few
sheep and pigs in their backyards.23
It was not, however, Anatolia’s agricultural production that attracted the Assyrian mer-
chants but rather its richness in minerals.24 The Anatolians possessed great quantities of
copper, but they depended on Assyrian imports for the supply of tin, which was used to pro-
duce the highly valued bronze. The Assyrians, meanwhile, purchased gold and silver from
the Anatolians to take home with them. Silver was extracted in the Taurus Mountains in the
region to the south of Nig˘de; it was also imported from the west, and the city of Burusˇhat-
tum was one of its major markets. Along with copper, silver was one of the principal forms
of payment for small expenditures. One part of the silver acquired by the Assyrians was
converted to gold at a rate of six to eight shekels of silver for one shekel of gold. The gold
came from the west and southwest of Anatolia, as well as from the mountains to the north-
east of Malatya.
16 Dercksen 2004b.
17 Michel 1997; Dercksen 2008b; Sturm 2008.
18 Kt o/k 52:10–11, Albayrak 2001, 308. 311.
19 Dercksen 2004a, 181–190.
20 Michel 2006a; Michel– Veenhof 2010; Lassen 2010.
21 Michel 2004; Dercksen 2008a; Kt g/t 35, cf. Balkan 1957 and Michel 2001, no. 62.
22 Nicola– Glew 1999.
23 Michel 1997; Michel 2006b.
24 Dercksen 2005.
CENTRAL ANATOLIA IN THE NINETEENTH AND EIGHTEENTH CENTURIES BC 115
Anatolia was a major producer of copper; the most heavily exploited mines could be
found along the coast of the Black Sea and in the region of Ergani.25 Durhumit was the prin-
cipal market for copper.26 Copper was a cheap metal, and it served as a currency for the pur-
chase of common goods. When it was alloyed with the tin that was imported by the Assy-
rians it was used to manufacture bronze. The Assyrians purchased copper at Durhumit,
refined it and traded it for silver at the markets in Burusˇhattum, Wahsˇusˇana and Kanisˇ.
Bronze was used for the manufacture of tools, weapons, plateware and many other ob-
jects.27 Metallurgical workshops discovered at Kültepe contained many moulds for bronze
tools, weapons and ingots.28
2 The Anatolian states: organization and relations
The textual record offers little information about the political structure, size, and economic
importance of the different Anatolian centers. The rare allusions to the political sphere
principally concern the Anatolian elite– for the most part, princes and palace officials in-
volved in negotiations with the Assyrians. We can also glean information from the sources
regarding events that interrupted trade activities, such as conflicts, rebellions, or the ab-
sence of the ruler. The latter could be either due to the king being on a journey or the throne
being vacant. The growing number of publications of tablets from Kanisˇ in the last two dec-
ades has made it increasingly possible to reconstruct more and more fragments of Anat-
olian history. We must nevertheless recall that the surviving sources are primarily Assyrian
and therefore only concern the regions within Anatolia that were visited by the Assyrian
merchants.
2.1 The zone of Assyrian activity in Asia Minor
At the beginning of the second millennium BC, a dozen or so localities in central Anatolia
underwent a process of rapid development: they were generally situated along the principal
axes of circulation, and included Kültepe, Ac˛emhöyük, Karahöyük Konya and Bog˘azköy.
Built on the ruins of Early Bronze Age settlements, these sites were fortified and now in-
cluded an upper part with a palace and temples– signalling the development of monumen-
tal architecture. The evolution of these cities seems to have been accompanied by profound
political, economic and social changes. Indeed, it is at this moment that they– having pre-
25 Dercksen 1996.
26 Michel 1991.
27 Özgüç 1986 and 2003; Dercksen 1996, 76–80; Sturm 2001; Michel 2008c.
28 Özgüç 1986, 39–51; Müller-Karpe 1994, 49–66.
116 CÉCILE MICHEL
viously been nothing more than the capitals of very small territorial states– began to attract
the interest of Assyrian merchants, who established themselves inka¯rum (orwabartum), lo-
cated in the lower part of the cities.29
The sites in the heartland of the Anatolian plateau are the main sources for our knowl-
edge of Anatolian chronology: they have furnished us with a highly precise stratigraphy as
well as numerous texts, seals and seal impressions. The Assyrians chose the site at Kültepe
as the center of their commercial operations in Asia Minor, which explains the more than
17,000 cuneiform texts discovered there over the last sixty years. Most of them were exca-
vated in the lower city, which included living quarters for both Anatolian and Assyrian mer-
chants, the central office of theka¯rum (b¯et ka¯rim, which has yet to be excavated), and a sanc-
tuary for the god Asˇsˇur. The citadel site reveals 18 strata of human occupation, ranging
from the Early Bronze Age to the Roman period (levels 10–6 correspond to the Middle
Bronze Age); the lower city’s stratigraphy only covers the Middle Bronze Age (IV-I). Levels
IV and III, which date to the end of the third millennium BC and cover a considerable sur-
face area, have not furnished us with any written sources. Level II, which corresponds to the
principal phase of Assyrian settlement in the area, was used from the last decades of the
20th century BC until 1835 BC. Most of the archives that have been excavated thus far date
to this period. The texts allow us to estimate that approximately 500Assyrians lived in the
lower city. The quarter partially burned down but it does not seem to have been abandoned,
as level Ib shows signs of occupation two or three years after the end of level II.30 This sec-
ond period of Assyrian inhabitation lasted until the end of the 18th century. Trade with
Assyria slowed down during this period, and the written sources exhibit few different sign
forms and spellings.31 The merchant quarters in Ali¸sar (Amkuwa) and Bog˘azköy (Hattusˇ),
which have each yielded less than one hundred tablets in excavations, are contempor-
aneous with the level Ib at Kanisˇ.32 Level Ia of Kanisˇ, meanwhile, corresponds to a phase of
Assyrian withdrawal; no written documents have been unearthed from this period, al-
though the discovery of ceramics imported from Syria testifies to the ongoing exchanges
occurring at this time between Anatolia and Upper Mesopotamia.33
The trade documented in the detailed archives of the merchants at Kanisˇ dealt mostly
with metals and textiles– neither of which has left much of a trace in the archaeological rec-
ord. On the other hand, the rich findings of furniture discovered at Kanisˇ and other sites on
the Anatolian plateau gives us an excellent idea of the material culture of the Bronze Age in
the region. Ceramics, seals, and impressions of seals allow us to delimit the areas, in which
the Assyrian merchants were active. This area can be specifically defined by the toponyms
mentioned in the Assyrian archives. For example, to the Southwest, the site of Karahöyük
29 Yakar 1998; Sagona– Zimanski 2009.
30 Günbattı 2008.
31 Kryszat 2008a.
32 Dercksen 2001.
33 Emre 1995; Emre 1999.
CENTRAL ANATOLIA IN THE NINETEENTH AND EIGHTEENTH CENTURIES BC 117
Konya produced a considerable number of seal impressions showing that this site was part
of the trade network that was initiated by the Assyrians.34 According to the texts, Burusˇhat-
ˇ
tum and Saladuwar were the two most western cities in the Assyrian trade network. Bu-
rusˇhattum can no longer be identified with Ac˛emhöyük,35 but Karahöyük Konya is a pos-
sible candidate for its modern location, although Barjamovic (2011) situates it further to the
ˇ
west. Saladuwar was probably situated to the northwest of the Salt Lake, perhaps in the
bend formed by the Sakarya Nehri. Wahsˇusˇana and Nenasˇsˇa were also located to the West
of Kızılırmak. The cities of Ulama and Usˇsˇa, which were situated in the southern part of the
plateau, also belonged to the trade network. To the north, the Assyrians traveled as far as
Zalpa (Zalpuwa), close to the Black Sea. In the southeast, we assume that they never went
further than Hahhum (Samsat), a city on the Euphrates, because the city of Karkemisˇ is not
mentioned in the texts.
2.2 The political organization of Anatolia
At the beginning of the second millennium BC, central Anatolia was divided into multiple
political centers, ranging in size from small, fortified city-states to true territorial states with
a capital and surrounding villages. The archives of Kanisˇ mention about 500 toponyms.
Unfortunately, their importance remains obscure in most cases. The Assyrians doubtlessly
took up residence in the largest and most economically developed of the cities. The econ-
omic resources of these states varied considerably depending upon their geographic lo-
cation: certain regions played a crucial role in the silver trade (Burusˇhattum to the west),
others in the copper trade (Durhumit to the north) and still others in wool (Mamma and Lu-
husaddia to the south).36
The Assyrian terminology for Anatolian political entities is not at all precise. The term
ma¯tum, “country”, logically refers to the territory of a city-state. But certain Assyrian mar-
riage contracts make a distinction betweena¯lum, “the City” (meaning Asˇsˇur), andma¯tum,
“the Country”, which corresponds in this case to Central Anatolia.37 The archives dating to
Level II of theka¯rum at Kanisˇ (19th century BC) mention the territories of Burusˇhattum,
Kanisˇ, Luhusaddia, Wahsˇusˇana and Zalpa to the north. The region situated along the in-
terior of the Kızılırmak bend– the “Hattum”– contained several important cities, including
Amkuwa, Hattusˇ, Tawinia, and Tuhpia. A marriage contract summarizing the area of activ-
ity for one Assyrian merchant references Kanisˇ, Burusˇhattum and the Hattum.38
34 Alp 1968.
35 Dercksen 2001, 60f.; Miller 2001; Michel 2002.
36 Garelli 1989; Michel 1991; Michel– Veenhof 2010.
37 ICK 13.
38 Prag I 490.
118 CÉCILE MICHEL
The Assyrians first established themselves in Kanisˇ, the capital of a territorial state,
which became their administrative center for the entire period. There were about ten vil-
lages belonging to the kingdom of Kanisˇ (including Dadasun, Hailawakuwa, Meliliya, Tal-
wahsˇusˇara, Tatasˇa, Tiwara and Utisˇa39). Next, the Assyrians slowly settled the region be-
tween Upper Mesopotamia and Anatolia, and they createdka¯rums in the cities of Eluhut,
Nihria, Hahhum, Ursˇu, Southern Zalpa, Timilkia, Tegarama, andS ˇ alahsˇuwa. Then they ex-
panded their zone of activity towards the north (Hattusˇ,S ˇ imala,S ˇ inahutum, Tawinia, Tisˇ-
murna, Tuhpia, Durhumit,S ˇ amuha), and to the west (Wahsˇusˇana andS ˇ aladuwar) and to-
wards the southwest (Nenasˇsˇa, Burusˇhattum40). They also established themselves in about
fifteenwabartums– a trading post under the authority of the nearestka¯rum– at Amkuwa,
Hanaknak, Hurrama, Karahna, Kuburnat, Kusˇsˇara, Mamma,S ˇ amuha,S ˇ uppilulia, Ulama,
Upe¯, Usˇsˇa, Wasˇhania, Northern Zalpa and Zimishuna. During the period of theka¯rum II,
the Assyrians settled in more than forty localities.
In the next phase, which corresponds to level Ib of theka¯rum at Kanisˇ (18th century
BC), some states increased in size and importance, while others disappeared entirely from
the Assyrian zone of activity. Kanisˇ was among the largest with more than twenty villages in
its territory, as recorded in a list of palace personnel discovered in the remains of the cita-
del.41 The kingdom of Mamma also seems to have had vassals, according to a letter sent by
its king.42 Burusˇhattum in the west disappeared entirely from the documentation in this
period, while Wahsˇusˇana became insignificant. The number of cities with an Assyrian mer-
chant “colony” also diminished: the texts mention only ten ka¯rums (Durhumit, Eluhhut,
Kanisˇ, Kuburnat, S ˇ aladuwar, S ˇ uppilulia, Tawinia, Tegarama, Wahsˇusˇana and Wasˇhania)
and fivewabartums (Amkuwa, Hurrama?, Mamma,S ˇ amuha, Timilkia?).
In spite of all this information, it is impossible to delineate the frontiers of the king-
dom of Kanisˇ or its neighbors. The territory of Kanisˇ bordered to the southeast the terri-
tories of Luhusaddia, Hurrama, andS ˇ alahsˇuwa. Contracts for the sale of slaves seem to sug-
gest that the major political frontier was the Euphrates.43
2.3 The internal political organization of Anatolian states: the example of Kaniˇs
Each city-state was ruled by a dynasty. The rulers were alternately calledruba¯’um, “prince”,
andruba¯tum, “princess”, but were also often known just by a nisba (“Man of GN”: Hattu-
sˇa¯ıum, Nenasˇsˇa¯ıum, Wahsˇusˇana¯ıum, Timilkia¯ıum and Tipurzia¯ıum). The Akkadian term
39 Forlanini 1992; Dercksen 2008b.
40 Veenhof 2008a, 164–167.
41 Kt g/t 36 and Kt g/t 42 + Kt z/t 11, Bilgiç 1964; Günbattı 1987; Forlanini 1992, 175f.; Dercksen 2004b; Derck-
sen 2008b.
42 Balkan 1957; Michel 2001, n. 62.
43 Hecker 1997.
CENTRAL ANATOLIA IN THE NINETEENTH AND EIGHTEENTH CENTURIES BC 119
sˇarrum “king” was used in the plural as sˇarra¯num during the ka¯rum Ib to designate petty
kings, vassals of the princes of Mamma and Kanisˇ. The Sumerian equivalent, LUGAL, was
used for the term ruba¯’um in the expression LUGAL GAL, meaning “Great Prince” (the
equivalent of ruba¯’um rabi’um). Certain kingdoms were governed by a princely couple,44
others by a princess ruling alone.45 In these latter cases, we are not certain whether the
woman in question was a widow or the daughter of a ruler who died without a male heir.
In the ka¯rum II period, we know of fifteen Anatolian states that were governed by a
“prince”: Amkuwa, Burusˇhattum, Durhumit, Hattusˇ, Hurrama, Kanisˇ, Kuburnat, Luhus-
addia, Mamma, Nenasˇsˇa,S ˇ inahutum, Tawinia, Timilkia, Tuhpia, Wahsˇusˇana, Wasˇhania. At
˘
Burusˇhattum, the local ruler was sometimes called “Great Prince”, ruba¯’um rabi’um and
must have had vassals.
Anatolian legal documents in theka¯rum Ib period give the name of a local ruler and of
hisrabi simmiltim (literally “chief of the stairs”), a title which sometimes corresponds to that
of crown prince. Coming from Kanisˇ, these sources are primarily concerned with the local
dynasty46 (see below). Princes are also referenced at other Anatolian sites – at Amkuwa,
Kanisˇ, Luhusaddia, Mamma, S ˇ alahsˇuwa and Tawinia – but we do not know their names.
The ruler exercised power from his palace. It was the center of the Anatolian adminis-
tration and housed many hundreds of people, including high officials in charge of different
sectors, workers, and artisans. The building called the “palace of Warsˇama”, dating from
layer Ib at Kanisˇ, occupied more than a hectare.47 Old Assyrian sources dating to the level II
period mention palaces at fifteen different locations; in the following period, only the palace
at S ˇ alahsˇuwa is mentioned. The fifty surviving titles we have for Anatolian officials (gen-
erally constructed on the principle of rabi+substantive) suggest a sophisticated adminis-
tration that oversaw every sector of the palace economy. However, we know little about the
activities of individual officials.48 The known titles are Assyrian translations of Anatolian
terms, and they sometimes cause confusion. At the top of the hierarchy was therabi sim-
miltim; below him were therabi sikkatim, who had commercial and military responsibilities
(he supervised the “chief of the troops”,rabi ummana¯tim), and therabi hursˇa¯tim, “chief of
warehouses”, who was in charge of the palace storage units. The responsibilities of the “sec-
ond man”, thesˇinahilum, are unclear, as are those of the “steward” (alahhinnum), especially
as it appears to be possible for one person to hold both offices. These two terms, borrowed
from Hurrian, are attested in other Akkadian texts;49 they also appear in the abstract form
in the Old Assyrian corpus (alahhinnuttum,sˇinahiluttum).50 The “majordomo”,rabi b¯etim,
44 KTK 106; Kt 93/k 145.
45 Kanisˇ: Michel 2001, n. 207; Luhusaddiya: Michel 2001, n. 10; Wahsˇusˇana: KTS150c; Ali¸sar: OIP275.
46 Veenhof 2008a, 169–173.
47 Özgüç 2003, 187–192.
48 Veenhof 2008a, 219–245.
49 Dercksen 2007, 37f.
50 Veenhof 1989, 518.
120 CÉCILE MICHEL
supervised the palace domain, while the “chief of the gates”,rabi abulla¯tim, along with the
“chief of the porters”,rabiu¯tu’¯e, oversaw the palace entrances, undoubtedly assisted by the
guards under the authority of the “chief of the guards”,rabi massara¯tim.
··
Among the prince’s intimates were the “chief scepter-bearer”,rabi hattim, the “chief
˙˙
cup-bearer”, rabi sˇa¯q¯e, and the “chief of the tables” rabi pasˇsˇu¯r¯e. The prince’s private staff
perhaps also included the “chief vizier”,rabisˇukkallim, the “chief of the heralds”,rabi na¯-
gir¯e, the “chief of the messengers”,rabi la¯sim¯e, and the “chief of the interpreters”,rabi tar-
gumann¯e.
The “men”,aw¯ıl¯e, the “workers”,sa¯b¯e, and the “slaves”,urd¯e, were overseen by three
·
different officials. The artisans, under the overall direction of the “chief of the workers”,
rabi sa¯b¯e/sa¯bim, were further separated into different trades, each supervised by another
· ·
chief, such as the “chief of the metalworkers”,rabi nappa¯h¯e, who worked closely with the
“chief of the arms”,rabi kakk¯e, himself answerable to therabi sikkatim. In the agricultural
sector, we find the “chief of the barley”, rabi sˇe’¯e, the “chief of the threshing floor”, rabi
adrim, the “chief of the gardens”, rabi kiria¯tim, and the “chief of the gardeners”, rabi
nuk(i)ribb¯e. Other officials were given charge of a single sector of production, like the “chief
of the vegetables”,rabiu¯rq¯e, “the chief of the wine”,rabi kira¯nim, the “chief of the flax”,rabi
kitta¯tim, and the “chief of the oil”,rabisˇamnim, who was charged with collecting (sesame?)
oil and distributing it throughout the palace. The “chief of the wood”,rabi esse, was probably
··
responsible for supplying the palace and its kitchens with firewood. The officials who over-
saw the palace flocks were given titles reflecting the animals they were charged with super-
vising: the “chief of the horses”,rabi sis¯e, the “chief of the mules”,rabi perdim, the “chief of
the dogs”,rabi kalba¯tim. One Peruwa, apparently “chief of the shepherds”,rabi r¯e’¯e/r¯e’im,
whose records were unearthed during the earliest excavations at Kültepe, accumulated
enough wealth to purchase an entire village. The goods produced by the palace lands were
doubtlessly sold under the authority of the “chief of the market”,rabi mah¯ırim. In the reli-
gious domain, finally, the prince had at his disposition the “chief of the oblates”,rabisˇar¯ıq¯e,
and the “chief of offerings”, rabi niq¯e. The palaces of Anatolia were clearly economic
centers, and had many dealings with foreign merchants.
Aside from palace officials and artisans the Anatolian population was essentially rural,
free but poor (hupsˇum). The farmers cultivated just enough to support the needs of their
family, and the majority of the land belonged to the urban elite and to the palace. The prince
often bestowed land or even entire villages on palace officials, either as gifts that they were
then free to resell, or as compensation for services rendered. The service due to the king or
to a high official – called arha¯lum, and mentioned only in the archives at Kanisˇ – was
required only if someone lived in the “household of the king”; if the person left the house-
hold (because of a divorce, for example), he became exempt from service.51 Among the
kinds of service that counted for thearha¯lum was the corvée (unusˇsˇum), principally docu-
51 Dercksen 2004b, 140–147.
CENTRAL ANATOLIA IN THE NINETEENTH AND EIGHTEENTH CENTURIES BC 121
mented during theka¯rum Ib and whose name, Hurrian in origin, also appears in the sec-
ond half of the second millennium at Alalakh IV and at Ugarit (asb¯elu¯ unusˇsˇim).52 In one
surviving trade agreement, the ruler of Kanisˇ promises not to disturb the Assyrians while
taking a census of the people bound to theunusˇsˇum service.53
It was not unusual that individuals entered into slavery in order to pay off a debt, either
sold by a relative or by themselves; they could buy their freedom back after a certain amount
of time had passed. The amount of time that had to pass was agreed upon when the person
was sold into debt slavery, and usually they had to pay at least double the price of their orig-
inal debt. The sale of Anatolian slaves was supervised by the reigning prince or by one of his
representatives.
The texts offer little information on the priesthood, and we have no understanding of
the organization of the temples. The only temples mentioned are those to Anna and Nipas.
The patron deity of Kanisˇ seems to have been Anna (ilat a¯lim) and the texts give other
names to the deities revered by the inhabitants of the city-state: Hikisˇa, Ilalianta, Kubabat,
the Lord of the Battle (B¯el qablim), Nisaba (Halki), Pirwa, the storm god, and the sun god.
We also know the names of a certain number of priests, either because they appear in com-
mercial transactions, or because they were landowners, but we know nothing of their activ-
ities in the religious cult.54
2.4 Foundations for a political history of Anatolia
Giving a continuous account of the political history of Anatolia during theka¯rum periods
would be impossible at this stage; in fact, the information given by the Assyrian archives on
local political events is brief and undated. During the level II at Kanisˇ (ca. 1950–1835 BC),
the Anatolian city-states, whether powerful or weak, were sometimes allies and sometimes
rivals; their urban centers were all fortified, suggesting repeated conflict. Each city-state
secured trade agreements with the Assyrians independently of the others.55 The absence of
a strong central power in Anatolia undoubtedly helped the commercial activities of the
Assyrians, whose business in turn guaranteed a certain degree of intra-Anatolian stability
by unifying the local trade in copper and wool. The peace guaranteed by the commercial
treaties reflected an ideal situation, not necessarily the reality: the correspondence of mer-
chants testifies to various internal political problems, including unrest following the death
of a prince, rebellions of various kinds, and the forming of coalitions and conflicts between
the Anatolian states.56 A vacant throne or political instability within a city-state often
52 von Dassow 2008, 162f.
53 Kt00/k 6:84, Günbattı 2004; Veenhof 2008a, 193.
54 Kryszat 2006.
55 Veenhof, in print.
56 Michel 2008a; Michel 2008b.
122 CÉCILE MICHEL
brought caravan traffic to a halt, or even caused the city to be closed to foreigners.57 The ab-
sence of a local sovereign during a military expedition could plunge the state into anarchy;58
similarly, the belligerent behavior of a ruler could disrupt trade in the region: “the king has
shed blood and his throne is no longer secure. The treaties are postponed. The princes are
watching one another.”59 Certain texts refer to the oaths (mam¯ıtum) sworn by different sov-
ereigns so as to form an alliance, like that between Wahsˇusˇana and Kanisˇ;60 but the refer-
ences to conflicts between Anatolian states are more frequent, as Assyrian merchants were
sometimes unwillingly involved. Asˇsˇur-takla¯ku, whose archives were excavated in 1993,
seems to have been taken hostage in the war between Tawinia and Wasˇhania.61 The move-
ments of kings are also mentioned in the archives whenever they cause the caravan routes
to be closed to commercial traffic;62 these royal journeys reflected diplomatic relations be-
tween certain Anatolian princes.
The period of the ka¯rum II was marked by an ongoing war to the west between the
cities of Burusˇhattum and Wahsˇusˇana, a conflict in whichS ˇ aladuwar was involved several
times: “Invade the land of Wahsˇusˇana! Otherwise, I am your enemy.”63 And again: “until
therabi sikkatim makes the princes of Burusˇhattum, Usˇunalam, and Wahsˇusˇana swear an
oath, he must not visit (these places)”.64 The battle turned in favor of the city-state of Bu-
rusˇhattum, the main market for silver, which took on importance at the end of theka¯rum II,
during which the Assyrian community abandoned the city of Wahsˇusˇana.65 In the same
period (or perhaps at the beginning of theka¯rum Ib), the princes ofS ˇ inahutum, Amkuwa
and Kapitra joined in an alliance against the king of Hattusˇ.66
The information at our disposal for the period of theka¯rum Ib in Kanisˇ (ca. 1830–1700)
changes as the sources are of lesser quality and of a very different nature. References to
relations between the principalities become rarer, and the majority of references to the local
princes themselves come from Anatolian contracts notorized by the local sovereign and by
the rabi simmiltim; ka¯rum Ib has also yielded several trade agreements. Hurmeli?, Har-
patiwa, Inar and his son Warsˇa/uma, Pithana and his son Anitta, and Zuzzu succeeded to
the throne of Kanisˇ during the 18th century BC.67 In a letter addressed to Warsˇama, prince
of Kanisˇ, Anum-hirbe, Hurrian prince of Mamma, recounts the invasion of his kingdom
and the plundering of his villages by a vassal of the ruler of Kanisˇ; he also refers to the long
57 Kt93/k 179 and 237; Michel 2008a.
58 Kt92/k 526; Veenhof, in print.
59 Michel 2001, no. 98 et 99.
60 Michel 2001, no. 65.
61 Michel– Garelli 1996; Günbattı 2001; Michel 2008a.
62 Kt93/k 685, 7–18; see also Kt92/k 194.
63 Michel 2001, no. 57.
64 Michel 2001, no. 100 and also no. 64.
65 Barjamovic et al. 2012; Veenhof, in print.
66 KTK10, Larsen 1972; Michel 2001, no. 63.
67 Veenhof 2008a, 169–173; Kryszat 2008b; Kryszat 2008c; Barjamovic et al. 2012.
CENTRAL ANATOLIA IN THE NINETEENTH AND EIGHTEENTH CENTURIES BC 123
siege of Harsamna carried out by his father, Inar.68 The same conflict may have been refer-
enced in an unpublished letter sent to theka¯rum at Kanisˇ by the assembly of Asˇsˇur: it gives
an account of a war between Harsamna and Zalpa, just after the death ofS ˇ amsˇ¯ı -Adad and
the ascension of Isˇme-Dagan to the throne.69 The reigns of Pithana and Anitta are docu-
mented by the Anitta text, a later Hittite document, which recounts how Pithana, king of
Kusˇsˇara, conquered Kanisˇ and dethroned its king.70 Anitta succeeded his father to the
throne of Kanisˇ and enjoyed great success on the battlefield: he bestowed upon himself the
title of Great Prince (ruba¯’um rabium). He destroyed Hattusˇ around 173071 and occupied the
palace of Warsˇama, which he had not destroyed. As the new king of Kanisˇ he ordered the
construction of two temples. Zuzu, king of Alahzina, the latest of the conquerors of Kanisˇ,
is the last known ruler (Great Prince) of Kanisˇ; he probably reigned from about 1725 until
the last years of the 18th century.72 The rivalries between Anatolian states seem to have been
the cause of the end of the ka¯rum Ib: several kingdoms disappeared entirely and are no
longer documented during the Hittite period.
3 The population of the trading posts in Anatolia
The main motivation for the presence of the Assyrians in Asia Minor was above all related
to trade and was based on the treaties ratified by local authorities; other merchants, coming
from Syria and Upper Mesopotamia, also frequented the Anatolian trading posts. At Kanisˇ,
the relations between foreign merchants (especially Assyrian) and the Anatolians went
beyond just the exchange of trade-goods; interactions between the two communities are vis-
ible in the material culture, the language and the writing. Mixed marriages became com-
mon and a hybrid society developed within the lower city.73
3.1 The Assyrians
The Assyrians living in the lower city quarters were administratively and legally indepen-
dent from the local authorities. Yet they were connected to the government of Asˇsˇur via the
ka¯rum at Kanisˇ. Interactions with local authorities were determined by the treaties signed
by the representatives of theka¯rum and the local prince; these agreements recognized the
mutual and complementary interests of the two parties and guaranteed peaceful coexist-
68 Balkan 1957; Miller 2001.
69 Günbattı 2005.
70 Warsˇama, ca. 1750; Carruba 2003; Barjamovic et al. 2012.
71 Kryszat 2008c.
72 Kt j/k 625 and Kt89/k 625; ca. 1716 according to Barjamovic et al. 2012.
73 Michel 2010.
124 CÉCILE MICHEL
ence between them. The Anatolian palace collected an import duty on merchandise and
had preemptive purchasing rights to textiles; in exchange, the Assyrians were permitted to
reside within the ka¯rum and were accorded certain protections. Similarly, their caravans,
men, animals and merchandise were protected along guarded routes.74 The first Assyrians
to settle at Kanisˇ, usually the eldest sons of trading families, came to Anatolia to represent
their family firms. They did not necessarily come from the wealthiest classes of Asˇsˇur, but,
being generally richer than the indigenous population, they quickly became the major
creditors in Anatolia. Many of them had houses in theka¯rum; others lived temporarily in
the homes of other Assyrians, sometimes leaving their archives there.75
Two treaties dating from theka¯rum Ib have been discovered at Kanisˇ in recent years:
one was negotiated with the Great Prince of Kanisˇ (either Anitta or Zuzu) and the other
with dignitaries from Hahhum.76 They guaranteed that caravan traffic would continue
even during times of conflict, and depict a situation slightly different from that of the
ka¯rum II. The texts thenceforth distinguish Assyrians who resided in the ka¯rum (wasˇbu¯-
tum) from those involved in the caravan trade with Asˇsˇur (a¯liku¯sˇsˇa harra¯n a¯lim).77 The
former, who were completely invested in intra-Anatolian trade, seem to have been less
prosperous, and often in debt. Individual clauses in the treaties therefore protected Assy-
rian households withtamka¯rum or widows from seizure of property by Kanisˇites,hap¯ıru¯, or
the local prince.78
3.2 The “Anatolians”
In the lower city, the Assyrians dealt with many different ethnic groups whom they invari-
ably designated with the generic term nu’a¯’um, meaning “Anatolian”. For the Assyrians,
this term was not pejorative; the Anatolians, meanwhile, designated the Assyrians by the
wordtamka¯rum, which signifies “the merchant”.79 The Anatolians in Kanisˇ lived either in
the citadel or in the lower city; those who lived in the latter were often merchants. Many of
them bore personal names with either a Hittite or Luwian etymology; certain others had
names of Hattic origin – an agglutinative language which does not belong to any known
linguistic family but which seems to have been influenced by Luwian.80 The Hittites and
Luwians, both Indo-European populations, seem to have arrived in central Anatolia during
the last centuries of the third millennium. Hittite became the dominant language in central
74 Michel 2001, no. 87; Veenhof 2003.
75 Michel– Garelli 1997, 27–34.
76 Günbattı 2004; Veenhof 2008a, 183–218.
77 Barjamovic et al. 2012.
78 Veenhof 2008a, 147–182.
79 Michel 2010.
80 Garelli 1963, 127–168; Dercksen 2002; Goedegebuure 2008.
CENTRAL ANATOLIA IN THE NINETEENTH AND EIGHTEENTH CENTURIES BC 125
Anatolia from about the 19th century forward; the majority of linguistic borrowings dis-
covered in the Old Assyrian archives are taken from an early form of Hittite.81
The archives discovered in certain houses in theka¯rum in Kanisˇ show a concentration
of houses belonging to the Assyrians in the north and more houses belonging to the Anat-
olians in the south, but the separation between the communities was not so clear. Assyrians
and Anatolians interacted on a daily basis and the use of different languages does not seem
to have been an obstacle to communication, a fact confirmed by the numerous “native”
words to be found in Old Assyrian texts. The interpreters (targumannum) were not numer-
ous and seem to have been principally employed by the government administration to
maintain commercial and diplomatic relations between local palaces and theka¯rum offices.
It is possible that these translators may have offered their services to other foreign mer-
chants doing business in Kanisˇ.
3.3 The Hurrians and other foreigners in Anatolia
The archives taken from Kanisˇ mention other groups of foreigners, designated by the lan-
guages they speak: certain personal names have an Amorite or Hurrian etymology, and cer-
tain individuals are identified as natives of foreign places, such as Ebla, indicating that there
were close commercial contacts between the Anatolian plateau and northern Syria.82 The
laws of the city of Asˇsˇur prohibited Assyrians from selling gold to the different groups they
traded with at Asˇsˇur (except to the Elamites) or on the road to Asia Minor, including the
Akkadians (meaning Babylonians) to the south of Asˇsˇur with whom they traded goods; the
Amorites, whose territories they crossed where the Euphrates curves to the west, at the
Upper Jazirah (where the village of Nihriya, among others, is located); and the Subareans
(or Hurrians), who lived to the north of Asˇsˇur along the Tigris and in the mountains of
Upper Mesopotamia.83 The gods of Amurru and Subartu are invoked in a treaty ratified be-
tween Asˇsˇur and Apum.84
During ka¯rum Ib period (18th century), the Hurrians, who several centuries later
would found the kingdom of Mittani, progressively settled west of the Euphrates, south of
the Anti-Taurus, and east of Anatolia.85 Although tablets dating from theka¯rum II at Kanisˇ
contain words of Hurrian origin86 as well as cloth produced in Hurrian territory or woven in
the Hurrian style,87 the majority of Hurrian personal names mentioned in the Old Assyrian
81 Dercksen 2007.
82 Bilgiç 1992; TPAK1 109:4; Kt88/k 525:5–6, cf. Michel 2010b; Kt91/k 338:2; Kt94/k 421:28.
83 Michel 2001, no. 2.
84 Eidem 1991; Kryszat 2003.
85 Veenhof 2008c; Wilhelm 2008; Michel 2012.
86 Dercksen 2007.
87 Michel– Veenhof 2010; Michel 2012.
126 CÉCILE MICHEL
archives appear in texts dating from theka¯rum Ib. This is the case, for example, with two
letters addressed to a Hurrian named Unapsˇe, who had temporarily or definitively settled in
Kanisˇ.88 In the first of these letters, Ehli-Addu, writing from western Syria, reclaims the re-
imbursement of a debt left unpaid for two decades; he mentions witnesses in the city of
Hasˇsˇum, quite certainly located in the region of Gaziantep.89 In the second letter, Abduata
asks Unapsˇe to send a tablet containing a proposition about a sale of textiles to a scribe who
understands and reads Hurrian.90 In both cases, these letters have no connection to other
documents in the archive. Two other documents excavated in 1990 contain foreign names,
mostly Hurrian. The arbitration Kt 90/k 358+359, dating presumably to the ka¯rum Ib
period and concerning commercial affairs that took place in part at Burusˇhattum, involved
one Urumum and the Hurrian Dakip-sˇarri.91 The letter Kt90/k 360 was addressed to five
persons bearing Amorite and Hurrian names: G/Kalali, whose official title,halsuhlu, was
·
Hurrian, the Amorite Zimr¯ı-Addu, or Hasˇip-Tesˇsˇup, a Hurrian personal name that is men-
tioned in the archives of Shemshara, and later in those of Nuzi.92 The foreign syllabary and
composition of this letter, which recalls festive days spent by the author in the company of
the ruler of Kanisˇ, suggests that it was sent from somewhere along the Upper Tigris or east
of the river. These various documents indicate that during theka¯rum Ib, new populations
took an interest in trade with Anatolia. Finally, the best known Hurrian, who moved into
Anatolia in the 18th century BC, is the ruler of Mamma, Anum-hirbe, who was the author of
a letter sent to his counterpart at Kanisˇ.93
3.4 Relations between different ethnic groups
At Kanisˇ, the Assyrians settled in the lower city; they purchased houses built in the local
style and used the pottery produced by local craftspeople for their everyday needs. Never-
theless, certain traces bear witness to their foreign origins.94 Artifacts discovered in their
tombs and houses indicate cultural practices that were typical for the Assyrians. Although
they were immersed in a cultural and linguistic environment that was very different from
their own, the Assyrians adapted their vocabulary to the local realities. The Old Assyrian
tablets include numerous loandwords, not only from an early version of Hittite spoken at
Kanisˇ, but also from Hurrian.95 Unfortunately, the documentation is very vague when it
88 AKT434:23.
89 Kt k/k 4, Hecker 1991 and 1996; Wilhelm 2008.
90 Subarean; Kt91/k 539, Veenhof 2008c.
91 Michel 2010b.
92 Michel 2010b.
93 Balkan 1957; Miller 2001.
94 Michel 2010a.
95 Dercksen 2007.
CENTRAL ANATOLIA IN THE NINETEENTH AND EIGHTEENTH CENTURIES BC 127
comes to information on the integration of other foreigners into the culture of the lower city
at Kanisˇ; for example, written documents mentioning the Hurrians, whose presence is par-
ticularly well attested during the ka¯rum Ib, are still too few to allow for any major con-
clusions.
The Anatolians, meanwhile, adopted the system of syllabic writing used by the Assy-
rians but did not attempt to apply it to their own language; they preserved the Old Assyrian
dialect, which had become the language of diplomacy. It is well known that Anatolian
scribes in the major urban centers wrote contracts that contained certain grammatical er-
rors, for example, confusing grammatical genders, clearly indicating the different linguistic
environments.96 Furthermore, some of the houses, in which archives were found, be-
longed to indigenous Anatolians. The Anatolians, who traditionally used stamp seals,
began using the cylinder seal under the influence of the Assyrians and developed a local
style that borrowed elements from Old Babylonian, Old Assyrian and Old Syrian styles, all
of which had arrived through trade.97
At first the Anatolians acted as clients of the Assyrians: they purchased Assyrian mer-
chandise, paid directly or with credit, and those who did not belong to the elite often ap-
peared in the records as debtors to the Assyrians, owing small sums of silver, copper, or
sacks of grain. Some Anatolians, however, entered into real trade partnerships with the As-
syrians: they were entrusted with merchandise, lending capital and selling slaves. During
their lengthy residency in Anatolia, certain Assyrians, already married at Asˇsˇur, got mar-
ried for a second time to Anatolian women.98 Others settled in Kanisˇ with their families;
Assyrian widows took Anatolian men as second husbands. The Assyrian population of
Kanisˇ decreased perceptibly during the second half of the 18th century (at the end of the
ka¯rum II); nevertheless, long-distance trade continued with Asˇsˇur. According to the royal
archives at Mari, in the 18th century BC (during the ka¯rum Ib), great trade caravans still
traveled between Asˇsˇur and Kanisˇ, and this trade remained profitable both for investors in
Asˇsˇur and Assyrians in Kanisˇ, who had accounts at the local trading post. Many Assyrian
merchants gradually climbed upwards on the social scale, while other Assyrian merchants
got more and more involved in the local trade in copper and wool, lost contact with their
countrymen in Asˇsˇur, and at times became impoverished. Specific clauses included in the
treaties dating from theka¯rum Ib make some attempts at protecting these Assyrians, who
were cut-off from their homeland and increasingly immersed in a hybrid Assyrio-Anatolian
community.99
96 Dercksen 2007; Kryszat 2008a.
97 Özgüç 1965; Özgüç 2006.
98 Michel 2008d.
99 Michel 2010a; Barjamovic et al. 2012.
128 CÉCILE MICHEL
The Old Assyrian archives excavated at Kanisˇ, Amkuwa and Hattusˇ allow us to reconstruct
some aspects of the political, economic and social history of Anatolia in the first centuries of
the second millennium BC. The presence of the Assyrians in Central Anatolia was pri-
marily economic and not political. They were the most numerous and best organized
foreigners in the Anatolian trading posts, especially at Kanisˇ, where they did business with
other merchants from southwestern Turkey, from northern Syria and from Upper Mesopo-
tamia. Among the Upper Mesopotamians, individuals bearing Hurrian names, although
rare during theka¯rum II, seem to have become well established in eastern Anatolia during
the ka¯rum Ib. Their arrival in Anatolia from Upper Mesopotamia, where certain Hurrian
rulers reigned (in, for example, the state of Idamaras100), seems to have coincided with
·
the reign of S ˇ amsˇ¯ı-Adad.101 Letters found at Kanisˇ, most probably dating to the ka¯rum
Ib, which contain an unusual syllabary as well as Hurrian expressions and personal
names, show the increasing interest the Hurrians had for Anatolia, where certain Hurrian
speakers had taken power.102 In any case, the documentation of the Hurrian presence
in Anatolia in the 18th century BC remains limited: only 2% of the discovered documents
at Kanisˇ date from the ka¯rum Ib period, and they are for the most part still unpublished.
Finally, with the departure of the Assyrians involved in long distance trade at the end of
the 18th century, writing disappeared from Anatolia for nearly a century, during which
time the Hurrian presence must have slowly taken on a more substantial and structured
form.103
Bibliography

# FIGURE

# BIBLIOGRAPHY

Albayrak 2001
I˙. Albayrak, Kültepe Metinlerinde Geçen m¯a’û “Su” Kelimesi, Anadolu Medeniyetleri Müzesi
2000 Yıllıg˘ı (Ankara 2001) 300–311.
Alp 1968
S. Alp, Zylinder und Stempelsiegel aus Karahöyük bei Konya, TTKY V/26 (Ankara 1968).
Balkan 1957
K. Balkan, Letter of King Anum-Hirbi of Mama to King Warshama of Kanish, TTKY VII/31a
(Ankara 1957).
Barjamovic 2011
G. Barjamovic, A Historical Geography of Ancient Anatolia in the Old Assyrian Colony
Period, CNIP38 (Copenhagen 2011).
100 Cf. Guichard (this volume, p. 147–160).
101 Cf. J. Eidem (this volume (p. 137–146).
102 Anum-hirbe at Mamma, for example; Miller 2001.
103 Cf. de Martino (this volume p. 61–74).
CENTRAL ANATOLIA IN THE NINETEENTH AND EIGHTEENTH CENTURIES BC 129
Barjamovic et al. 2012
G. Barjamovic – Th. Hertel – M. T. Larsen, Ups and Downs at Kanesh – Chronology, History
and Society in the Old Assyrian Period, OAAS 5, PIHANS 120 (Leiden 2012).
Bilgiç 1964
E. Bilgiç, Three Tablets from the City Mound of Kültepe, Anatolia8, 1964, 145–163.
Bilgiç 1992
E. Bilgiç, “Ebla” in Cappadocian Inscriptions, in: H. Otten et al. (eds.), Hittite and Other
Anatolian and Near Eastern Studies in Honour of Sedat Alp (Ankara 1992) 61–66.
von Dassow 2008
E. von Dassow, State and Society in the Late Bronze Age Alalah under the Mittani Empire,
˘
SCCNH17 (Bethesda 2008).
Dercksen 1996
J. G. Dercksen, The Old Assyrian Copper Trade in Anatolia, PIHANS75 (Istanbul 1996).
Dercksen 2001
J. G. Dercksen, ‘When we met in Hattusˇ’. Trade according to Old Assyrian Texts from Alishar
and Bog˘azköy, in: Wilfred H. van Soldt et al. (eds.), K. R. Veenhof Anniversary Volume,
PIHANS89 (Leiden 2001) 39–66.
Dercksen 2002
J. G. Dercksen, Kultureller und wirtschaftlicher Austausch zwischen Assyrern und Anato-
liern (Anfang des zweiten Jahrtausends v.Chr.), in: B. Harmut et al. (eds.), Brückenland Ana-
tolien? Ursachen, Extensität und Modi des Kulturaustausches zwischen Anatolien und
seinen Nachbarn (Tübingen 2002) 35–43.
Dercksen 2004a
J. G. Dercksen, Old Assyrian Institutions, MOS Studies4, PIHANS98 (Leiden 2004).
Dercksen 2004b
J. G. Dercksen, Some Elements of Old Anatolian Society in Kanis, in: J. G. Dercksen (ed.),
Assyria and Beyond. Studies Presented to Mogens Trolle Larsen, PIHANS 100 (Leiden
2004) 137–178.
Dercksen 2005
J. G. Dercksen, Metals According to Documents from Kültepe-Kanish Dating to the Old
Assyrian Colony Period, in: Ü.Yalcun (ed.), Anatolian MetalIII. Der Anschnitt, Beiheft18
(Bochum 2005) 17–34.
Dercksen 2007
J. G. Dercksen, On Anatolian Loanwords in Akkadian Texts from Kültepe, ZA 97, 2007,
26–46.
Dercksen 2008a
J. G. Dercksen, Subsistence, Surplus and the Market for Grain and Meat at Ancient Kanesh,
AoF35, 86–102.
130 CÉCILE MICHEL
Dercksen 2008b
J. G. Dercksen, Observations on Land Use and Agriculture in Kanesˇ, in: C. Michel (ed.), Old
Assyrian Studies in Memory of Paul Garelli, OAAS4, PIHANS 112 (Leiden 2008) 139–157.
Dönmez– Beyazıt 2008
S¸. Dönmez– A. Y. Beyazıt, A General Look at the Central Black Sea Region during the Middle
Bronze Age and a New Approach to the Zalpa Problem in the Light of New Evidence, in:
J. G. Dercksen (ed.), Anatolia and the Jazira during the Old Assyrian Period, OAAS 3,
PIHANS 111 (Leiden 2008) 101–135.
Eidem 1991
J. Eidem, An Old Assyrian Treaty from Tell Leilan, in: D. Charpin– F. Joannès (eds.), Mar-
chands, diplomates et empereurs. Études sur la civilisation mésopotamienne offertes à Paul
Garelli (Paris 1991) 185–207.
Eidem 2011
J. Eidem, The Royal Archives from Tell Leilan. Old Babylonian Letters and Treaties from the
Lower Town Palace East, PIHANS 117 (Leiden 2011).
Emre 1995
K. Emre, Pilgrim-Flasks from Level I of the Ka¯rum of Kani¸s, BMECCJ8, 1995, 173–200.
Emre 1999
K. Emre, Syrian Bottles from the Ka¯rum of Kani¸s, BMECCJ11, 1999, 39–50.
Fairbairn 2006
A. S. Fairbairn, Archaeobotany at Kaman Kalehöyük 2005, Kaman-Kalehöyük 15, 2006,
133–138.
Fairbairn 2007
A. S. Fairbairn – C. Longford – B. Griffin, Archaeobotany at Kaman Kalehöyük (2006),
Kaman-Kalehöyük16, 2007, 151–158.
Forlanini 1992
M. Forlanini, Am Mittleren Kızılırmak, in: H. Otten et al. (eds.), Hittite and Other Anatolian
and Near Eastern Studies in Honour of Sedat Alp (Ankara 1992) 171–179.
Forlanini 2006
M. Forlanini, Étapes et itinéraires en Asˇsˇur et l’Anatolie des marchands paléo-assyriens: nou-
veaux documents et nouveaux problèmes, Kaskal3, 2006, 147–176.
Garelli 1963
P. Garelli, Les Assyriens en Cappadoce, Bibliothèque archéologique et historique de l’Institut
français d’archéologie d’Istanbul19 (Paris 1963).
Garelli 1989
P. Garelli, Le marché de Burusˇhattum, in: K. Emre et al. (eds.), Anatolia and the Ancient Near
East. Studies in Honour of Tahsin Özgüç (Ankara 1989) 149–152.
Günbattı 1987
C. Günbattı, YenidenI˙¸slenen Bir Kültepe Tableti (Kt g/t 42+z/t 11), Belleten51, 1987, 1–10.
CENTRAL ANATOLIA IN THE NINETEENTH AND EIGHTEENTH CENTURIES BC 131
Günbattı 2001
C. Günbattı, The River Ordeal in Ancient Anatolia, in: W. H. van Soldt et al. (eds.), K. R. Veen-
hof Anniversary Volume, PIHANS89 (Leiden 2001) 151–160.
Günbattı 2004
C. Günbattı, Two Treaty Texts Found at Kültepe, in: J. G. Dercksen (ed.), Assyria and Beyond.
Studies Presented to Mogens Trolle Larsen, PIHANS 100 (Leiden 2004) 249–268.
Günbattı 2005
C. Günbattı, 2000 ve 2001 Yılı Kültepe Kazılarında Ele Geçen Bazı I-b Tabletleri, 5.UHKB,
Çorum 2002 (Ankara 2005) 445–451.
Günbattı 2008
C. Günbattı, An Eponym List (KEL G) from Kültepe, AoF35, 2008, 103–132.
Hecker 1991
K. Hecker, Zur Herkunft der Hethitischen Keilschrift, in: S. Alp (ed.), Uluslararası 1. Hitito-
loji Kongresi Bildirileri (19–21 Temmuz 1990, Çorum) (Ankara 1991) 53–63.
Hecker 1996
K. Hecker, Zur Herkunft der Hethitischen Keilschrift, in: D. I. Owen– G. Wilhelm (eds.),
Nuzi and the Hurrians. Richard F. S. Starr Memorial Volume, SCCNH8 (Bethesda 1996)
291–303.
Hecker 1997
K. Hecker, Über den Euphrat (Ortsbezogene Restriktionen in aA Kaufurkunden), ArchAn. 3,
1997, 157–172.
Kryszat 2003
G. Kryszat, Zur Liste des Schwurgötter im Assur-Apûm-Vertrag, Isimu6, 2003, 99–102.
Kryszat 2006
G. Kryszat, Herrscher, Herrschaft und Kulttradition in Anatolien nach den Quellen aus den
altassyrischen Handelskolonien. Teil2: Götter, Priester und Feste Anatoliens, AoF33, 2006,
102–124.
Kryszat 2008a
G. Kryszat, The Use of Writing among the Anatolians, in: J. G. Dercksen (ed.), Anatolia and
the Jazira during the Old Assyrian Period, OAAS3, PIHANS 111 (Leiden 2008) 231–238.
Kryszat 2008b
G. Kryszat, Herrscher, Kult und Kulttradition in Anatolien nach den Quellen aus den alt-
assyrischen Handelskolonien. Teil 3/1: Grundlagen für eine neue Rekonstruktion der Ge-
schichte Anatoliens und der assyrischen Handelskolonien in spätaltassyrischer Zeit, AfO35,
2008, 156–189.
Kryszat 2008c
G. Kryszat, Herrscher, Kult und Kulttradition in Anatolien nach den Quellen aus den alt-
assyrischen Handelskolonien. Teil3/2: Grundlagen für eine neue Rekonstruktion der Ge-
schichte Anatoliens und der assyrischen Handelskolonien in spätaltassyrischer Zeit II,
AfO35, 2008, 195–219.
132 CÉCILE MICHEL
Larsen 1972
M. T. Larsen, A Revolt against Hattusˇa, JCS24, 1972, 100f.
Larsen 2002
M. T. Larsen, The Asˇsˇur-na¯da¯ Archive, Old Assyrian Archives1, PIHANS96 (Leiden 2002).
Lassen 2010
A.W. Lassen, The Trade in Wool in Old Assyrian Anatolia, JEOL 42, 2010, 159–179.
Marro 2004
C. Marro, Upper-Mesopotamia and the Caucasus: Essay on the Evolution of Routes and
Road Networks from the Old Assyrian Kingdom to the Ottoman Empire, in: A. Sagona
(ed.), A View from the Highlands. Studies in Honour of Charles Burney (Leiden 2004)
91–120.
Michel 1991
C. Michel, Durhumid, son commerce et ses marchands, in: D. Charpin– F. Joannès (eds.),
Marchands, Diplomates et Empereurs, Etudes sur la civilisation mésopotamienne offertes à
Paul Garelli (Paris 1991) 253–273.
Michel 1997
C. Michel, À table avec les marchands paléo-assyriens, in: H. Waetzoldt– H. Hauptmann
(eds.), Assyrien im Wandel der Zeiten, CRRAI39, HSAO6 (Heidelberg 1997) 95–113.
Michel 2001
C. Michel, Correspondance des marchands de Kanisˇ au début du IIe millénaire av. J.-C.,
LAPO19 (Paris 2001).
Michel 2002
C. Michel, Nouvelles données pour la chronologie du IIe millénaire, N.A.B.U. 2002/20.
Michel 2003
C. Michel, Old Assyrian Bibliography of Cuneiform Texts, Bullae, Seals and the Results of
the Excavations at Assur, Kültepe/Kanis, Acemhöyük, Alishar and Bogazköy, OAAS 1,
PIHANS97 (Leiden 2003).
Michel 2004
C. Michel, Theperdum-mule, a Mount for Distinguished Persons in Mesopotamia during the
IInd millennium B.C., in: B. S. Frizell (ed.), Man and Animal in Antiquity, Acta Instituti Ro-
mani Regni Sueciae (Roma 2004) 194–204 (http://www.svenska-institutet-rom.org/pecus/
contents.html).
Michel 2006a
C. Michel, Femmes et production textile à Asˇsˇur au début du IIe millénaire avant J.-C., Tech-
niques & culture 46, 2006, 281–297.
Michel 2006b
C. Michel, Les suidés dans la documentation de Kanisˇ au début du IIe millénaire avant J.-C.,
in: B. Lion– C. Michel (eds.), De la domestication au tabou: le cas des suidés au Proche-
Orient ancien, Travaux de la Maison René-Ginouvès1 (Paris 2006) 169–180.
CENTRAL ANATOLIA IN THE NINETEENTH AND EIGHTEENTH CENTURIES BC 133
Michel 2008a
C. Michel, Nouvelles données de géographie historique anatolienne d’après des archives ré-
centes de Kültepe, in: K. Strobel (ed.), New Perspectives on the Historical Geography of Anat-
olia in the II and I millennium B.C., Eothen16, 2008, 235–252.
Michel 2008b
C. Michel, Les pérégrinations des marchands assyriens en haute Mésopotamie et en Asie
Mineure, Res Antiquae5, 2008, 371–388.
Michel 2008c
C. Michel, Etain et cuivre dans les archives commerciales du xixe siècle av. J.-C.: du com-
merce du métal à l’objet, Cahier des thèmes transversaux ArScAn VIII, 2006/2007, 59–65
(http://www.mae.u-paris10.fr/cahiers/pdf/C8/C8_Michel.pdf).
Michel 2008d
C. Michel, Les Assyriens et leurs femmes anatoliennes, in: J. G. Dercksen (ed.), Anatolia
and the Jazira during the Old Assyrian Period, OAAS 3, PIHANS 111 (Leiden 2008)
209–229.
Michel 2010a
C. Michel, Les comptoirs de commerce assyriens en Anatolie: emprunts réciproques et ac-
culturation, in: P. Rouillard (ed.), Portraits de migrants, portraits de colons II, Colloques de la
Maison René-Ginouvès6 (Paris 2010) 1–12.
Michel 2010b
C. Michel, Deux textes atypiques découverts à Kültepe, JCS62, 2010, 73–82.
Michel 2012
C. Michel, Subartu, RlA13, 2012, 225–227.
Michel– Garelli 1996
C. Michel– P. Garelli, Heurts avec une principauté anatolienne, WZKM86, 1996, 277–290.
Michel– Garelli 1997
C. Michel– P. Garelli, Tablettes paléo-assyriennes de Kültepe1 (Kt90/k) (Istanbul 1997).
Michel– Veenhof 2010
C. Michel– K. R. Veenhof, The Textiles Traded by the Assyrians in Anatolia (19th–18th Cen-
turies BC), in: C. Michel– M. L. Nosch (eds.), Textiles Terminologies in the Ancient Near East
and the Mediterranean Area from the 3rd to the 1st millennium BC, Ancient Textiles Series,
Oxbow Books, (Oxford 2010) 210–271.
Miller 2001
J. Miller, Anum-Hirbi and His Kingdom, AoF28, 2001, 65–101.
Müller-Karpe 1994
A. Müller-Karpe, Altanatolisches Metallhandwerk (Neumünster 1994).
Nicola– Glew 1999
J. Nicola– C. Glew, Assyrian Colony Period Fauna from Acemhöyük Level III: A Preliminary
Analysis, BMECCJ11, 1999, 93–148.
134 CÉCILE MICHEL
Özgüç 1965
N. Özgüç, Kültepe Mühür Baskılarında Anadolu Grubu/The Anatolian Group of Cylinder
Seal Impressions from Kültepe, TTKY V/22 (Ankara 1965).
Özgüç 1986
T. Özgüç, Kültepe-Kani¸s II. Eski Yakındog˘u’nun Ticaret Merkezinde Yeni Ara¸stırmalar. New
Researches at the Trading Center of the Ancient Near East. Türk Tarih Kurumu Yayınları V/41
(Ankara: Türk Tarih Kurumu Basimevi 1986).
Özgüç 2003
T. Özgüç, Kültepe Kanisˇ/Nesˇa. The Earliest International Trade Center and the Oldest Capi-
tal City of the Hittites (Istanbul 2003).
Özgüç 2006
N. Özgüç, Kültepe-Kanisˇ / Nesˇa. Yerli Peruwa ve Asˇsˇur-imitt¯ı’nin og˘lu Assur’lu Tüccar Usur-
·
sˇa-Isˇtar’ın Ari¸sivlerine ait Kil Zarfların Mühür Baskıları / Seal Impressions on the Clay En-
velopes from the Archives of the Native Peruwa and Assyrian Trader Usur-sˇa-Isˇtar son of
·
Asˇsˇur-imitt¯ı, TTKY V/50 (Ankara 2006).
Sagona– Zimansky 2009
A. Sagona– P. Zimansky, Ancient Turkey (London 2009).
Sturm 2001
Th. Sturm, Puzur-Anna¯ – Ein Schmied des K¯arum Kanisˇ, in: W. von Soldt et al. (eds.),
K. R. Veenhof Anniversary Volume, PIHANS89 (Leiden 2001) 475501.
Sturm 2008
Th. Sturm, Allanu– Haselnüsse als Delikatesse im karum-zeitlichen Handel von Anatolien
nach Nordmesopotamien (ca. 1930–1730 v.Chr), AoF35, 2008, 296–311.
Veenhof 2003
K. R. Veenhof, Trade and Politics in Ancient Asˇsˇur. Balancing of Public, Colonial and Entre-
preneurial Interest, in: C. Zaccagnini (ed.), Mercanti e Politica nel Mondo Antico (Roma
2003) 69–118.
Veenhof 2006
K. R. Veenhof, Traveling in Ancient Anatolia: Two New Sources from Karum Kanesh, in:
B.Avunç (ed.), Hayat Erkanal’a Armag˘an; Kültürlerin Yansıması. Studies in Honor of Hayat
Erkanal; Cultural Reflections (Istanbul 2006) 778–783.
Veenhof 2008a
K. R. Veenhof, The Old Assyrian Period, in: J. Eidem – K. P. Veenhof – M. Wäfler (eds.)
Mesopotamien. Annäherungen 5: The Old Assyrian Period, OBO 160/5, (Fribourg 2008)
13–264.
Veenhof 2008b
K. R. Veenhof, Across the Euphrates, in: J. G. Dercksen (ed.), Anatolia and the Jazira during
the Old Assyrian Period, OAAS3, PIHANS 111 (Leiden 2008) 3–29.
Veenhof 2008c
K. R. Veenhof, Some displaced Tablets from Ka¯rum Kanesh (Kültepe), AoF 35, 2008,
10–27.
CENTRAL ANATOLIA IN THE NINETEENTH AND EIGHTEENTH CENTURIES BC 135
Veenhof (in print)
K. R. Veenhof, Old Assyrian Traders in War and Peace, in: H. Neumann et al. (eds.), Krieg
und Frieden im Alten Vorderasien, CRRAI52, Münster, July17–21 2006 (in print).
Wilhelm 2008
G. Wilhelm, Hurrians in the Kültepe Texts, in: J. G. Dercksen (ed.), Anatolia and the Jazira
during the Old Assyrian Period, OAAS3, PIHANS 111 (Leiden 2008) 181–194.
Yakar 1998
Y. Yakar, Environmental Factors Effecting Urbanisation in Bronze Age Anatolia, in: J. Good-
nick Westenholz (ed.), Capital Cities, Urban Planning and Spiritual Dimensions (Jerusalem
1998) 99–109.
Yakar 2000
Y. Yakar, Ethnoarchaeology of Anatolia. Rural Economy in the Bronze and Iron Ages. Tel Aviv
University Monograph Ser17 (Tel Aviv: Tel Aviv University, Institute of Archaeology 2000).
136 CÉCILE MICHEL

