# METADATA
Author: ROBSON E.
Title: The Production And Dissemination Of Scholarly Knowledge
Year: 2012
Source_ID: Robson2012_TheProduct
Source_Type: article in book
Pages: 

# TEXT

BEcAusE Mesopotamian intellectual culture is so often characterized as conservative, traditional, and even 'canonical; because it is so difficult to identify 'authors in the cuneiform record, and because of the extreme patchiness of our evidence, the prospect of identifying innovation and creativity in cuneiform culture is a daunting one. However, the 'stream of tradition (Oppenheim 1960: 410) was not generated spontaneously and nor did it ever run smoothly. While this deservedly famous phrase rightly captures the fragility and longevity of Mesopotamian intellectual culture, it also has its problems. The word 'tradition' encapsulates the mid-century Assyriological consensus about the conservative nature of cuneiform culture, while 'stream' invokes a natural, self-perpetuating process that does not depend on individual creativity or local singularity. The worry is that the unreflecting repetition of Oppenheim's famous words sometimes does more harm than good, as it inhibits discussion of innovation, creativity, individualism, and localism in cuneiform culture.

At the coarsest level of chronological, geographical, and textual granularity, we see significant change, even after the long-recognized breakdown of Sumerophone intellectual culture at the end of the Old Babylonian period (e.g. Tinney in this volume). Genres came and went: Babylonian observational astronomy first appears in the mid8th century in the form of eclipse records (Hunger, Sachs, and Steele 2001) and survived until the 1st century Ap, but was never adopted in the Assyrian court. Horoscopic astrology was developed in the late 5th century (Rochberg 2004: 98-120), with other disciplines such as medicine and extispicy adapting to it shortly thereafter (e.g. Scurlock 2005-06; Heefel 2008). Mathematical astronomy took off in the 4th century (Britton 1993), with significant differences in methodology between Uruk and Babylon. We see changing trends even amongst the very last generations of cuneiform scholars in and-century Uruk: a steady shift away from the astrological series Enuma Anu Enlil towards ever more sophisticated mathematical methods of astronomical prediction, even while the lamentations and rituals of kalutu continued to be reproduced as before (Robson 2007b).
It is much harder to identify compositions or genres falling out of use, most obviously because arguments from silence are always dangerous. But there is a further problem, in that 'use' has many meanings. Compositions may retain value as educational tools or have antiquarian worth even when not used for professional praxis. For instance, already in the Neo-Assyrian court, asipus never seem to have cited the diagnostic omen series Sakikku or to have written commentaries on it, although many manuscripts of this work were kept in the royal library there (Frahm 2004: 50; Robson 2008b). It is perhaps easier--though answering a rather different question--to see when the various scholarly titles stopped being used. For instance, both asus 'physicians and barus 'extispicers --diviners from the entrails of sacrificial animals--are ubiquitous in the 7th-century correspondence of the Neo- Assyrian court. But asus are apparently never mentioned in the written records of later Babylonia, while barus seem to disappear from the temple archives of Sippar, Uruk, and Babylon by the early Achaemenid period. (The youngest dated reference to a bard in a non-scholarly document known to me is Strassmaier (1889: no. 234) from 574 BC, but there are undated references from the archive of the Eanna temple in Uruk that may be a little later.) However, the kalu 'lamenter' and asipu (later also masmassu) 'exorcist' are recorded to the very end of cuneiform documentation in late 2nd-century Uruk, where the profession tupsar Entima Anu Enlil 'scribe of (the celestial omen series) "When Anu, Enlil" is no longer a separate profession but a title taken by kalus or asipus on completing apprenticeships with those already expert in astronomy (Robson 2008a: 258-260). At Marduk's temple Esangila in Babylon, kalus and asipus were allocated food and clothing until at least the late 4th century Bc (Beaulieu 2006: 13-14), while the tupsar Enuma Anu Enlil were still active there a full 200 years later (Rochberg 2004: 234-235).
So where did new compositions and genres come from? How and why did they replicate or fail to? And how and why did they eventually fall out of favour? Within the limits of this chapter I cannot hope to provide definitive answers but I shall aim to provide some tools for thinking further about these fascinating and important questions. We will look first at potential bodies of evidence for the production and dissemination of new knowledge and then at how creativity and mobility play out in the historical record.

BODIES OF EVIDENCE

When Oppenheim coined the expression the 'stream of tradition in 1960, it was perhaps not surprising that he saw it as homogenous, so that 'the picture offered by the library of Assurbanipal in Nineveh is essentially representative (Oppenheim 1960: 412; 1977:15-16). For at that time Assurbanipal's library was the only large, securely dated and provenanced corpus of first-millennium cuneiform scholarship that was accessible to research. Much of the remaining available material was from the antiquities market or very informal excavations--such as those conducted in northern Babylonia for the British Museum in the 1870s onwards--which could thus be dated and provenanced only very approximately. Yet he predicted that:
"when Assyriologists will be able to follow the fate of individual text groups through the history of their tradition, they will obtain more insights into the workings of this 'stream' and, conceivably, light will be shed some day on ideological preferences and other attitudes that neither the content nor the wording of these texts is likely to reflect directly." (Oppenheim 1960: 412; 1977: 16)
Indeed, over the past century, and especially between the Second World War and the First Gulf War, controlled and recorded excavations of first-millennium sites have uncovered several substantial finds of scholarly tablets i situ, which offer the potential for careful geographical and chronological analysis. In the first decades of the 20th century, several such groups of tablets were discovered in the cities of Assur and Babylon but the long, sad history of their post-excavation misfortunes means that, with a few notable exceptions, many are now almost impossible to reconstruct in any useful detail (Pedersen 1985-86; 2005; Maul 2003; 2010; Clancier 2009: 105-213; Robson forthcoming b). Similarly, the discovery in 1924 of a small group of early NeoBabylonian scholarly tablets in Kis was badly managed and then largely forgotten (Moorey 1978: 48-50; Robson 2004: 46-62). More promising, as we shall see, are the find groups from British expeditions to 7th-century Huzirina and Kalhu, Iraqi excavations in 6th- to 5th-century Sippar and Babylon, and German digs at 5th to 2nd-century Uruk.
These corpora are valuable not solely because we can be confident of their dating and archaeological provenance but also because of their colophons. Colophons - a feature of many scholarly tablets, particularly from the first millennium--were written at the end of the main text as a sort of book-plate or catalogue record (Hunger 1968). They typically contain information about the text itself, the tablet on which it was written, and those who wrote it and for whom--all crucial data for historians of the 'tradition'.
Huzirina (modern Sultantepe) was a tiny town in western Assyria, about 15 km north of the provincial capital Harran, both of which were destroyed by the Medes and their allies in the final rout of the empire in 610 Bc. Parts of the mound were excavated briefly by a joint British-Turkish archaeological team in the early 1950s, revealing a cache of about 400 scholarly tablets piled up outside the door of a substantial private house, protected by a semi-circular arrangement of wine-jars (Lloyd and Gokce 1953; Gurney and Finkelstein 1957; Gurney and Hulin 1964). Were they deposited there for safe-keeping from the invaders or dumped as worthless fill for a piece of outdoor furniture? That is not clear, but it is safe to assume that they originated in the house itself, as unused tablet clay was also found in the central courtyard (on tablet manufacture see Taylor in this volume). The principal, but by no means only, names on the tablets' colophons were those of one Qurdi-Nergal, a Sangu-priest of the god Zababa and his consort, and other members of the Nur-Samas family. 
Kalhu, an Assyrian royal city on the Tigris between Assur and Nineveh, served as the capital until the 8th century and continued to be occupied until its destruction in 614 Bc and beyond. In 1955-57 British excavators unearthed around 250 scholarly tablets from a room in Ezida,the temple of Nabu god of wisdom, on the royal citadel ~(Wiseman and Black 1996; Black 2009). More such tablets were discovered by an Iraqi team in the mid-198o0s. Their findspot, a room whose doorway directly faced Nabu's shrine, was almost certainly the temple's library.|Some of its original contents had been moved elsewhere in antiquity, perhaps to Sargon II's capital Dur-Sarrukin and certainly to Nineveh, where many tablets with(Kalhu colophons were discovered in 19th-century excavations (Robson, forthcoming b). Perhaps not surprisingly, the few extant colophons feature the names of royal scholars such as Adad-Sumu-usur and Nabu-zeru-lesir, Esarhaddon's chief asipu and chief scribe respectively in the early 7th century Bc. Both men were sons of Sargon II's great advisor Nabu-zuqup-kenu, who had been based at Kalhu himself. 
A generation later than these two Neo-Assyrian finds is a group of about 260 school tablets discovered in Babylon by an Iraqi team in the late 1970s. They had been used as bricks in the foundations of the shrines of two small temples near the northeast corner of the precinct of Etemenanki, Marduk's ziggurat, some time during the reign of "Nebuchadnezzar II (1. 604-562 Bc). The larger was dedicated to the god Nabu-Sa-hare (Nabu of accounts (?)') and the smaller to the minor goddess Asratu. Almost all of them originally bore colophons naming their student authors and dedicating them to Nabu, 12-16). Northwest of Babylon, in the city of Sippar, the main temple was Ebabbar, dedicated to the sun-god Samas. In the mid-1980s Iraqi excavators found about 800 scholarly tablets, still in their pigeonholes in a small storage room in the northwest wi i as probably named E-ulmas and dedicated to the goddess Annunitu, Samass divine consort. Although only about thirty tablets have been published so far, dates on their colophons range from the mid- to late 6th century Bc and feature kalus, asipus, and a trainee baru from several different families (provisionally, see Anonymous 1987: 248-249 and pl. XLVII; Fahdil and Hilgert 2008: 183 with full bibliography). Further south and about a century younger, another important set of finds for the history of cuneiform scholarship comes from a house in the city of Uruk, rebuilt several times from the late 5th to early 4th centuries Bc and perhaps later. It was excavated in the late 1960s to early 1970s by German archaeologists, who found about 420 scholarly tablets in it, some stored in large jars but most scattered by later burials dug down between the walls, as well as about fifty household legal documents. It turned out that the tablets had belonged to two different families of aSipus: the Sangu-Ninurta family, who had occupied the house until about 420 Bc, and the Ekur-zakir family, who had lived there about a century later (Hunger 1976; Weiher 1982; 1988; 1993; 1998; Clancier 2009: 47-72, 387-405). 
Our final group of scholarly tablets is from the enormous temple to the sky-god Anu/Zeus in Uruk, which was dug in the late 1950s and early 1960s by the same German team who were later to find the asipus' house. They unearthed some 110 scholarly tablets, plus about thirty administrative records, from a small room near the southeast gateway to the temple where illicit diggings had been made in earlier decades. The formally excavated tablets, which date to the first half of the 2nd century Bc, are clearly the remains of a much larger group, including many tablets sold on the antiquities market in the early 20th century and thereby dispersed throughout museum collections worldwide. The core can be identified through colophons of the Ekur-zakir and Sin-leqe-unninni families of asipus and kalis, but it is impossible to reconstruct exactly which of the illicitly excavated tablets were originally stored with the formally excavated ones (Dijk and Mayer 1980; Clancier 2009: 73-80, 406-409).
This, then, is our raw material: six substantial groups of scholarly tablets from reasonably well-defined find spots spanning the 7th to the and centuries Bc. Two, from Huzirina and Uruk, were found in or near domestic dwellings, the rest in temples. Two, Huzirina again and Babylon, had clearly been dumped outside their original use context, while only one, from Sippar, was still configured as its users had intended. Several are conventionally labelled as 'libraries' (e.g. Pedersen 1998), but we should think carefully before using this term to mean anything more than an excavated assemblage of non-archival tablets. As we shall see, the colophons and other evidence show that these collections were not all used by the same types of people for the same types of functions--and that only Kalhu (partially) conforms to Oppenheim's classic model of Assurbanipal's library at Nineveh.
This should not surprise us. Most obviously, the royal tablet collections of Nineveh were enormous compared to the six assemblages just described. As Jeanette Fincke (2004) reminds us, as well as the main 'library' in Sennacherib's Southwest Palace, there were substantial holdings in Assurbanipal's North Palace and the temples of Nabu and Istar on the royal citadel, amounting to some 26,000 tablets (plus some 4,500 administrative and legal records). But the means by which the collections accrued were also unusual, if not unique. Naturally, many tablets were written in situ, as copies, commenataries, or new compositions. But successive Assyrian kings, even before Assurbanipal, scoured Babylonia for tablets and writing-boards, to be taken or copied forcibly (see Frahm in this volume). In 647 Bc alone, at least 2000 tablets and 300 writing-boards made their way from private collections into the palaces of Nineveh according to inventories found there (Parpola 1983). Fincke (2004: 55) estimates that nearly 3700 scholarly tablets from Nineveh are in Babylonian script--around 1 in 7 of the total (excluding administrative and legal tablets). Many more were copied into Assyrian script and given royal colophons (Frahm 2004: 47). Clearly neither temple communities nor scholarly families had the means (or the ambition?) to accrue writings en masse like the Assyrian kings did. With the partial exception of Kalhu--which too was an Assyrian royal collection staffed by court scholars--we cannot therefore assume that other 'libraries' are simply miniature copies of Nineveh's.

DISSEMINATION THROUGH EDUCATION

The obvious starting point for understanding the dissemination of cuneiform literacy in the first millennium Bc is the scribal school. Indeed, Oppenheim (1960: 411; 1977: 13-14) saw scribal training as a 'purely operational though highly effective device' which consisted in 'copy[ing] faithfully the texts that made up the stream of traditio and thereby kept it flowing relatively unchanged. He contrasts this apparently straightforward imperative with other possible motives, such as'the desire to preserve a body of religious writings, and 'the wish to sustain one tradition against the opposition of, or in competition with, rival traditions, neither of which he detects in cuneiform culture. In this view the 'stream is entirely without human agency: scholarly works are copied simply as a means of inducting new members into the profession, with little sense of the motivations behind the 'duty' or 'faith' ascribed to them.
In Oppenheim's day very little was known about the means by which the young became cuneiform literate. As the contributions to this volume amply show, a huge amount of research over the past fifteen years has dramatically improved our understanding of this process, especially for the Old Babylonian period (e.g. Tinney, Veldhuis, and Weeden in this volume). It is now clear that scribal training was not simply an 'operational' matter, a purely functional exercise in teaching the mechanics of cuneiform script. In 18th-century Nippur, for instance, the intensive study of Sumerian literature was very carefully geared to situating scribal students within a clearly defined and constructed professional community. The careful choice of hymns to long-dead kings, narrative myths and legends about traditional figures, and paradigmatic texts about the attributes of an ideal society all contributed to the 'creation of a Sumerian heritage' (Veldhuis 2004: 66-80). Furthermore, with its heavy emphasis on literacy, numeracy, and law this was a heritage that positioned the scribe at its centre, as the upholder of social justice on behalf of royalty and deity by means of fair measurement and accurate calculation (Robson 20078; 2008a: 97-124).
A comparison with contemporary training in non-professional cuneiform literacy reveals the heavy ideological freight of Nippurian scribal education. In 19th-century Assur, several hundred miles to the north of Nippur, junior members of merchant families learned enough cuneiform to communicate long-distance with their relatives and trading partners. The small numbers of extant exercises from Assur and its Anatolian trading colony Kane suggest that these skills were mostly learned on the job. But those practice tablets that do survive are all closely related to the merchants' immediate needs of writing about, and calculating with, the raw materials and manufactured goods in which they traded (Michel 2003: 139-140; Robson 2008a: 134-136). One can easily detect conventional components to the format of tablets and the content of exercises, but little sense of a selfconscious construction of a scribal or mercantile identity and heritage.
Nor was scribal education unchanging. The elementary curriculum of 18th-century Nippur was significantly different from that of the late second millennium (Veldhuis 2000), which in turn differed from scribal education in mid-first-millennium northern Babylonia. They share a commonality in the use of lexical lists, and memorization through repeated copying, to teach cuneiform script. But the texts themselves, the way they are excerpted, the formats of the tablets, and even the target language of instruction underwent significant change.
As Petra Gesche (2001) showed in her monumental study of Neo-Babylonian scribal exercise tablets from cities in northern Babylonia, plus Uruk and Ur in the south, in the mid-first millennium elementary training in cuneiform typically took place in two phases. In the first phase students concentrated on learning how to write the basic wedges that comprise cuneiform script, plus seven long core texts in their entirety (Gesche 2001: 44-48):
- the signs DIS+BAD (i.e. a vertical, horizontal, and diagonal wedge) repeated;
- the sign A repeated;
- the list of Akkadian syllables now called Syllabary A (S*);
- asimilar text known as Syllabary B (Sdeg);
- alist of deities, now known as the Weidner God List;
- Tablets I-III of the bilingual thematic noun list called UR,.RA = hubullu 'interestbearing loan, after its first line.
Short or long extracts from these exercises were written out on large, square, multicolumn tablets, often combined with brief passages from ad hoc and 'non-canonical' lists--for instance metrology, personal names, place names, professional designations, lexical lists--and/or literary works, proverbs, and administrative formulae, optionally with a colophon in the final column.
In the second phase long, single-column tablets were preferred, with dates of writing replacing colophons. Students continued to copy Syllabaries A and B, plus short excerpts from incantations, hymns, literary works, and more complex lexical lists, with up to four different compositions on a single tablet (Gesche 2001: 48-52).
Unfortunately, at this stage of research relatively little is known about the internal chronology or geography of first-millennium elementary education. But it is possible to identify consistent patterns of textual choice in the provenanced tablets groups mentioned above. For instance, we can compare the relative frequency of the core exercises written on the 260-odd Phase 1 tablets deposited in Nabu-Sa-hare's temple in Babylon with those in the entirety of Gesche's corpus (Table 26.1; data from Gesche 2001: 806-820).
Overall, the Nabu-Sa-hare tablets account for just under 1 in 5 (18%) of the examples of Phase 1 core exercises in Gesche's Neo-Babylonian corpus. Yet they show a relatively strong preference for the very basic sign-writing exercises and the Weidner God List (22-24%) and a distinct non-preference for the word list UR.RA= hubullu (6-14%). And fully half of the Nabu-a-hare tablets have surviving colophons, reflecting their function as votive offerings, compared to about 5% of the Phase 1 tablets from elsewhere. A particularly extensive example--from a compilation of Syllabary B, spellings, personal names, and a list of capacity measures--runs: 
Table 26.1 Core Phase 1 scribal exercises from the temple of Nabu-Sa-hare in Babylon as a proportion of published examples
Exercise Number in temple Total number Temple tablets as published percentage of total published The signs DIS+BAD, repeated 22 96 23% The sign A, repeated 18 82 22% Syllabary A 101 530 192% Syllabary B 66 357 182% Weidner God List 27 1 24% UR,.RA | 20 163 122% UR,.RA II 4 60 6% uR,.RA III 7 49 14% Total core Phase | exercises 259 1448 18%
"[To Nabu, his lord: for the life] of his breath, [the length of] his days, the health of his seed, [the well-being] of his heart, [the well-being] of his flesh, the non-existence of his illness, Nabu-esir-napisti, son of Sin-ahu, wrote the tablet and deposited it in E-gisla-anki ('House of the auditor of heaven and eartly), the temple of his lordship, in the gunnu receptacle. [He placed (?)] the tablet [in front of] Nabu [...]." (Cavigneaux 1981: 79.B.1.59+; Robson 2008a: 197)
Further differentiation of the corpus as a whole will undoubtedly reveal more clearly the textual choices individual teachers made, and perhaps even the reasons behind them. For instance, a fascinating but little-studied Neo-Babylonian lexical exercise called UM.ME.A = ummanu is attested on nearly forty Phase 1 tablets, including nine from Nabu-Sa-hare's temple. It is so named because its first line gives the logogram and Akkadian syllabic spelling for ummdanu 'expert. The second line does the same for Samallii 'apprentice, then its remaining forty-odd lines list a variety of logograms for ameelu 'man, Sarru 'king, various royal and courtly titles. It finishes with an impressive fourteen different writings for dsipu, 'exorcist' but no other scholarly profession (Gesche 2001: 127-132). The exercise clearly situates the trainee scribe--the trainee asipu?--in a world of courtly expertise but, intriguingly, one that lacks the asti, bard, kali, and tupsar Eniima Anu Ellil. (However, Gesche 2001: 128 n. 473 notes the existence of a single tablet from northern Babylonia listing many different logograms for the word barii 'diviner.) The list was copied in Sippar, Babylon, Kis, and Ur but is not attested amongst the elementary exercises from the dsipus' house in Uruk, where one might have expected it. Many of the so-called libraries are deeply implicated in scribal training too, albeit at a higher level than the elementary exercises from Nabu-Sa-hare's temple. For instance, there is just one Phase 2 school exercise amongst the scholarly tablets from Huzirina (Gurney and Hulin 1964: no. 176), but the colophons of another twenty-eight tablets refer to their authors as Samallis 'apprentices. Some of these men are members of the Nur-Samae family, the presumed owners of the house and tablets: the patriarch Qurdi-Nergal was himself a Samallti agaigu 'novice apprentice' in 701 Bc, then his sons MuBallim-Bau and Nabu-zer-kitti-lesir took similar designations. Finally his (great?-) grandson Ninurta-[...] was a Samallii sehru 'junior apprentice' in 619 Bc (Gurney 1997). But the remaining twenty Samalliis seem to be unrelated to this family (Hunger 1968: nos. 351-402 passim). They include one Nabu-sum-igkun, son of the turtanu's (commanderin-chief's) senior scribe; Bel-le'i-..., son of the turtanu's scribe; Sum-tabni-usur, son of a royal doctor; Nabu-ibni, son of an Assyrian scribe; and Mutaqqin-ASeur, son of a scribe of the city (namely Assur). In other words, they are all the offspring of well-connected, well-educated men of empire, perhaps sent to Huzirina in order to further their education. However, given the low quality of many of the Huzirina scholarly manuscripts, and its location far from the imperial centre, several miles from the provincial capital, we should not imagine this was a particularly prestigious institution. Rather, we might perhaps see it as a minor private school, taking the middle-achieving sons of provincial officials who could not afford the scribal training on offer in the royal cities of Assur, Kalhu, and Nineveh (Robson, forthcoming a).
This admittedly fanciful scenario may be stretching the evidence somewhat, but simiar patterns of non-familial apprenticeship can be identified in 7th-century Assur, amongst the scholarly tablets of the a3ipu Kisir-AS8ur (Maul 2010)--who perhaps ran precisely the sort of school that the Huzurina apprentices could not afford--and much ater in Hellenistic Uruk. Here the social network was much tighter, however: over six generations we see the members of just four scholarly families, all closely associated with Anu's temple Re&, collaborating in the training of their sons (Robson 20072). For instance, the kali Anu-belSunu of the Sin-leqe-unninni family wrote apprenticeship ablets for both his father Nidintu-Anu and one Anu-belSunu of the Alvutu family. He in urn trained his three sons in kaliitu, one of whom--Anu-aba-uter--also learned mathematical astronomy from Samae-etir of the Ekur-zakir family (who as a younger man had written scholarly tablets for Anu-uballit of the Hunzu family). Sama-etir was an asipu and the chief priest of ReSS, who also held the title tupsar Entima Anu Enlil. After his apprenticeship with Samas-etir had concluded, Anu-aba-uter also called himself tupsar Entima Anu Enlil and went on to teach at least one member of his own family as well as an Ekur-zakir boy. Complex as it is, this is just one part of the scholarly training network that can be traced in 2nd-century Uruk (Robson 2008a: 240-260).

TEXTUAL PRODUCTION: A CASE STUDY

To better understand how texts and tablets were produced by cuneiform scholars, we can take a closer look at one particular assemblage. As mentioned above, the asipus' house of late Achaemenid-early Seleucid Uruk yielded a total of 420 extant scholarly tablets (that is, excluding the forty-odd legal and administrative documents found in the house). 112 of them, nearly 27%, have surviving colophons. (Of the remainder, only nineteen, or about 5% of the total, definitely had no colophon at all.) These colophons contain crucial information about the circumstances of textual production. 
Fifty of the 112 tablets with colophons--45%--explicitly state that they are copies of an earlier manuscript, a further forty-eight (43%) definitely do not state that they are copies (even though many are), while fifteen (13%) are too fragmentary to tell whether they originally contained a copying-statement or not. Allowing for the problems of smallsample statistics, it seems reasonable to estimate that about half the colophons originally mentioned copying and half did not. What differences can be discerned between those tablets that are explicitly said to be copies from other sources, and those that are not?
Let us turn first to the 'copied' tablets. In fact, the scribes had several different ways for expressing this activity, using one or more of the following set phrases, and minor variants on them:
-'according to an old original/tablet/writing-board/copy from (somewhere)';
- 'copy of a wooden writing-board/old tablet';
- 'excerpted from a wooden writing-board';
- 'written and checked (and made good) against its original/from an old wooden writing-board';
- '(the scribe) wrote and checked (it) against its original.
Examples include:
"Copy of a writing-board, property of the Eanna temple, written and checked. Tablet of Sama8-iddin, junior asipu, descendant of Sangu-Ninurta." (The incantation series Bit Rimki 'Bath House tablet III, Weiher 1988: no. 66)
"Excerpted from a wooden writing-board. Oblong tablet of Anu-iksur, [...], asipu." (List of medico-magical ingredients, Hunger 1976: no. 56)
"According to an old tablet, Urukean copy. Rimut-Anu, son of Samae-iddin, descendant of Sangu-Ninurta, wrote and checked it. (Metrological tables, Weiher 1993: no. 172) Written, checked and made good according to its original. [Tablet of] Rimut-Anu [son of] Samas-iddin, descendant of Sangu-Ninurta, Urukean." (The Exorcist's Manual [see Schwemer in this volume], Weiher 1998: no. 231)

The originals include 'an old writing-board from Nippur' (Weiher 1982: no. 34), the 'writing-board, property of the Eanna temple in Uruk already mentioned (Weiher 1988: no. 66; 1993: no. 271), a Babylonian copy' of a writing-board (Weiher 1993: no. 80), anda tablet from among the old tablets of Meslam, the name of the god Nergal's temple at Cutha (Weiher 1998: no. 241), and even 'a copy from Der'; northeast of Babylon (Weiher 1993: no. 185) as well as six'Urukean copies. The originals are thus well travelled, but more than that we cannot yet say on current evidence: did scholars travel with their tablets and writing-boards? Were libraries dispersed--sold, even?--on a scholar's death or penury? Did apprentices travel in order to copy? Or were these tablets copied from manuscripts that were themselves made in Uruk, with an original from somewhere else far back in the train of transmission?
Fifteen of the originals are writing-boards and a further five are explicitly stated to be tablets, but in most cases the medium is not described. Does this mean we should assume that writing-boards outnumbered tablets 3:1 in late Achaemenid and early Seleucid Uruk, or rather that it often wasn't worth recording that the original was clay? This second alternative seems more likely, as two of the five explicitly mentioned tablet originals are rather special ones, including the tablet from the Meslam temple mentioned above.
As for what got copied, the fifty tablets include eighteen extracts from the big omen series such as Summa Alu, Summa Izbu, and Eniima Anu Enlil; fifteen copies of wellknown series of incantations and rituals, such as Lamastu, Bit Rimki, and Bit Meseri, while the remaining sixteen (where identifiable) are mostly medical, lexical, mathematical, and astrological. That is perhaps to be expected, but it is particularly striking that only four of these tablets--less than 10%--are commentaries:
"Word-commentary (satu) and oral tradition; reading from the Series Entima Anu Enlil [...], written and properly executed from a wooden writing-board. Tablet of Iqisa, son of I8tar-Suma-ere', descendant of Ekur-zakir. [Hand of] Anu-aba-usur, son of Anu-mukin-apli, descendant of Kuri. Uruk, [n]th day of Elulu (month VI), [...] of Philip, king of all lands." (Hunger 1976: no. 90)
"Word-commentary and oral tradition; reading from the Series Entima Anu Enlil. From the middle of "(If) in Nisannu (month I) on the 14th day an eclipse takes place and the god in his eclipsing: Finished. Written and properly executed from a writing board. : Lengthening(?) of lines. Tablet of Iqisa, son of I8tar-Suma-ereS, descendant of Ekur-zakir, a3ipu. Hand of Anu-aba-usur, son of Anu-mukin-apli, descendant of Kuri. Uruk, 3rd day of Elulu (month VI), 2nd year of Philip, king of the lands." (Weiher 1993: no. 162)
"Word-commentary and oral tradition; reading from the Series Entima Anu Enlil. From the middle of '(If) in Tasritu (month VII) the Moon is surrounded by a lunar halo. Tablet of IqiSa, son of IStar-Suma-ere', descendant of Ekur-zakir." (ThureauDangin 1922: no. 17)
"From a wooden writing board; mukallimtu-commentary to Eniima Anu Enlil [...], written (and) checked against the original. Tablet of [...], man of his god Nusku, priest of his goddess mother, son of...[...] Ur-Gula,...lapis lazuli...[...], descendant of Enlil-belunu, esakku-priest of Enlil. Hand of [...]." (Weiher 1988: no. 101)
It is also striking that all of these commentaries are on the celestial omen series Eniima Anu Enlil--nota professional specialism of either family--and that three were owned by Iisa, including two written for him by Anu-aba-usur of the Kuri family.
By contrast, amongst the forty-eight tablets in the asipus' house that do not explicitly claim to be copies, nineteen are described just as 'tablet (tuppu) of' so-and-so, another five as 'oblong tablet (gittu) of' so-and-so, and six are damaged but may have originally had either phrasing. Most of these are in fact copies of standard works; indeed all but of eight of them have a 'catchline giving the first line of the next part of the work, and/or a atement that this is a numbered tablet or section (persu) of a series, or that it is an extract (nishu) from a longer work. Another mentions a break (hipu) in the original.
In my opinion it is highly likely that the seven remaining tablets from this group of 30 are original compositions. Five are astrological works by Iqiga of the Ekur-zakir family and two are incantation rituals by his son Istar-Suma-ere' (Weiher 1993: nos. 240, 245). The latter have some parallel passages in other known rituals, but this sort of re-use is typical of the genre. Iqiga's astrological pieces are particularly interesting, as they represent a relatively new departure in cuneiform scholarship. The division of the ecliptic-- the path of the moon--into the twelve equal parts that we now call the zodiac is first recorded in the Astronomical Diaries in about 460 Bc (Brown 2000: 262). The first known horoscope, predicting an individual's life circumstances based on the zodiacal positions of the major celestial bodies at the time of the birth, is from 410 Bc (Rochberg 1998: no. 1). Iqiga, working almost a century later, is adapting traditional Babylonian learning to this new mode of thinking. In one text (Hunger 1976: no. 96) he lists constellations which are said to affect the zodiacal signs, organized sign by sign. Another (Weiher 1982: no. 43) is a zodiacal table and set of calculations for predicting birth dates, along with omens concerning neo-natal death under each sign. Iqia presumably conceived a further two (Weiher 1988: nos. 104, 105), which tabulate days of the month, zodiacal positions, and ritual annointings, as two members of a set of twelve. And in the last one (Weiher 1993: no. 159) Iqia equates each of the twelve major ominous zones of the liver, as defined in extispicy, with a god, a month, and a constellation.
The final eighteen tablets without explicit copying-statements in their colophons-- that is, some 37% of them--feature the words and phrases 'word-commentary' (satu), 'oral tradition (Sit pi), 'reading' (malsiitu), and '(questioning) of an expert's speech' ((maSS$altu) sa pi ummdni) in various combinations. For instance:
"Word-commentary and oral tradition of an expert's speech of '(If) a patient's tongue is red. Reading of Anu-iksur, son of SamaSS8-iddin, descendant of Sangu-Ninurta, junior dsipu, Urukean. "(Hunger 1976: no. 33)
"Word-commentary, oral tradition and questioning of an expert's speech from 'If an anomaly--its stomach is located at the place of its right lung. (Tablet) 18; finished (and) checked. Summa Izbu. Not completed. 'If a ewe eats its afterbirth. Oblong tablet of Iqisa, son of Istar-Suma-ereS, descendant of Ekur-zakir, asipu, Urukean." (Weiher 1982: no. 38)
And notably, while all three of the copied Entima Anu Enlil commentaries discussed above were produced by scribes who were not members of the Ekur-zakir or Sangu-Ninurta families, the men who actually lived in the house, only four of the eighteen non-copied commentaries (Hunger 1976: no. 84; Weiher 1982: nos. 36,54; 1998: no. 260) are not by Ekurzakir or Sangu-Ninurta men. In fact, most are by Anu-iksur of the Sangu-Ninurta family, perhaps written as part of his training (but unfortunately none of them is dated, so that conjecture cannot be proven). Further, all but one of those non-copied commentaries is to the three omen series Summa Alu, Summa Izbu, and Sakikkt, or to medical compendia, as one might expect of an apprentice asipu; the other is to a lexical list.
In short, twenty-five--about half--of the forty-eight tablets that do not have an explicit copying-statement in their colophons are almost certainly not copies of standard compositions. Two-thirds of those are commentary texts on copied works, but a third--all by Ekur-zakir men--are likely to be wholly original compositions. This is not a large percentage of the corpus by any means but is certainly a conservative estimate, for one can also find examples of original textual production amongst the asipus' tablets that do claim to be copies. For instance, a long and complex mathematical table, listing pairs of mutually reciprocal numbers (that is, whose product is 1), includes a few out-ofplace lines and arithmetical errors (Weiher 1993: 174). Serendipitously, the asipus' house has also yielded a crudely made tablet bearing calculations of reciprocals whose results exactly match a partially mistaken passage in the big list (Weiher 1993: no. 176; see Robson 2008a: 236-237). And yet that big list's colophon reads:
"Unfinished. According to an old original (of?) Rimut-Anu, son of Sama8-iddin, descendant of Sangu-[Ninurta]. Nadin, his..., wrote and checked it." (Weiher 1993: no. 174) 
The colophon is damaged and difficult to interpret confidently. But it suggests this was either an original, flawed composition of Rimut-Anu's, of which his calculation and Nadin's copy survive (but not Rimut-Anu's), or Rimut-Anu (and Nadin's?) erroneous 'correction of an older exemplar. Either way, there was active engagement in the mathematical content of the text, not simply rote copying for preservation's sake.

MOBILITY, STABILITY, AND ACCESSIBILITY

One outcome of the previous section is that about three-quarters of the tablets from the sipus' house in Uruk were definitely copied, if we can generalize from the 27% which have surviving colophons. We also saw that several of the originals from which the copies were made came from the cities of Babylon, Cutha, and Der. The collection even conains a 200-year-old 'antique' from Assurbanipal's library: a tablet bearing liver omens, with a colophon declaring that the great king himself had 'learned and understood in his heart the diviner's lore, the secret of heaven and earth, the wisdom of Sama' and Adad' and 'deposited it in his palace' (Weiher 1982: nos. 46). And amongst the colophons of the hirty published tablets from the Neo-Babylonian temple in Sippar are three replicas of exts from deep antiquity. The prologue to the Laws of Hammurabi (r.1792-1750 BC) was reproduced 'according to the inscriptions of a copy of the original stela that Hammurabi, king of Babylon, erected in Susa' (Fahdil 1998), while a votive dedication to the goddess Nanie on behalf of Zambiya, king of Isin (r. 1836-1834 BC) was copied from 'an inscripion that is on a bronze buck (Al-Rawi 2002). A third tablet contains copies of two wellknown building inscriptions of Gudea (r. 22nd century Bc) and Sulgi (r. 2094-2047 Bc) from ancient Laga8 and nearby Nigin, both also dedicated to Nange (Isma'il 1999-2000; cf. Edzard 1997: 1.7.26; Frayne 1997: 1.2.10).
If inscribed objects travelled long distances then so did the scholars, whether with heir writings or independently of them, for the heavy pedagogical emphasis on memorization meant that they carried much of their learning in their heads (see Weeden in his volume for the Middle Babylonian period). We have seen the many apprentice scribes from all over Assyria at Huzirina. Likewise at least fifteen tablets in the asipus' house at Uruk are by scribes that were not Ekur-zakir or Sangu-Ninurta family members, including two men from Der (Weiher 1993: nos. 125, 185) but it is a moot point whether it was the tablets or the scribes who had travelled there. And in one case, it even looks as though an entire scholarly institution moved (or branched out), at least once and perhaps even twice: Ezida, the royal temple of the scholarly god Nabu at Kalhu, was created anew at the new Assyrian capital, Dur-Sarrukin, in the late 8th century. It was hurriedly abandoned, perhaps unfinished, with the library only partially stocked, on the sudden and unpropitious death of Sargon II. Another new Ezida was then founded at Nineveh, the next new capital, shortly afterwards. Many of the tablets written for the Kalhu Ezida ended up there, along with newly commissioned tablets, while the rump of the original Ezida also continued to be textually productive to the end of empire in the late 7th century (Robson forthcoming b).
At first sight, then, it looks as though there was constant movement of both tablets and scholars, resulting in easy access to the whole of the current 'tradition as well as the recovery of lost works from antiquity. And yet it is rare to find complete sets of longer works in any collection. For instance, the large temple library in NeoBabylonian Sippar--whose tablets were recovered in their original storage niches-- contained just Tablets I, III, IX, and XIII of Lugal-e, an epic of the god Ninurta whose first-millennium version ran to fifteen chapters (Al-Rawi 1995). At least three of the four were made by one Nabu-etir-nap$ati of the Pahharu family, and all were stored together in niche 3A, along with a copy of Tablet III of the ritual series Mis P?, which was used to inaugurate and activate cult statues (Al-Rawi and George 1995). Similarly, the Sippar temple seems to have held only Tablets I, 1, IV, and V of perhaps eleven chapters of Standard Babylonian Atram-hasis (George and Al-Rawi 1996; on the Old Babylonian version of this myth, see van Koppen in this volume). Three were stored together in niche 6A, the other in niche 1D with, amongst others, a manuscript of Tablet I of The Poem of the Righteous Sufferer (George and Al-Rawi 1998). Only two colophons of the Atram-hasis tablets have been published: Tablet I was 'written from speech, while the dsipu Nanaya-apla-iddina, son of Dabibu, copied Tablet II 'according to its original. Even in Assurbanipal's library, none of the four identified sets of the eleven-chapter Epic of Gilgames is anywhere near complete (George 2003: 381-385).
Now, it is almost certain that no single scholarly tablet collection has been excavated in its entirety, even from the relatively intact library room in the temple at Sippar. Quite apart from the accidents of preservation and recovery of tablets, we have already noted the prevalence of long-perished wooden writing-boards in both personal and institutional contexts. Thus it could be argued that most scholars, most of the time, had full access to whatever they were interested in and that it is just we moderns who are lacking the full set of texts, over two millennia later. But George Houston's (2009) study of book collections in Roman Egypt and Italy, based both on ancient book lists and on surviving papyri, suggests otherwise. The Romans too struggled to acquire complete sets of major works, often collected individual chapters from different sources, and did not always store them as systematically as we might have expected. And, as Oppenheim (1960: 411; 1977: 14-15) anticipated, the simple fact that tablet collections were abandoned--whether in Kalhu and Huzirina because of major political catastrophes, or in the Uruk asipus' house for apparently domestic reasons--means that hundreds of manuscripts could disappear from circulation in a single event. Indeed, the Ekur-zakir family seem to have been entirely ignorant of the previous occupants tablet collection, which lay buried in jars just beneath the floor of their home.
Another inhibiting factor in the dissemination of the written word was the injunctions that the scholars themselves put on sharing specialist knowledge. In each of the six tablet collections discussed here, there are colophons that include protective clauses against theft or loss. For instance, the colophon on a tablet of bilingual incantations against the storm demoness Ardat-lili, copied by I8tar-Suma-ereS for his father Iqisa, ends: "Whoever fears the gods Anu, Antu and Ea shall not take it away, shall not deliberately let it be dropped. On the same day he shall return it to its owner's house. Whoever takes it away, may the gods Adad and Sala take him away." (Weiher 1982: no. 6)
But only thirty-eight of the Uruk asipus' tablets definitely contain such curse formulae in their colophons, while sixty-three definitely do not. (A further eleven are too damaged to read.) As Kathryn Stevens (2009) has shown, almost all of the thirty-eight contain standard, copied works related to the a3ipus' profession: the big omen series Summa Alu, Summa Izbu, and Sakikkd; rituals such as Bit Meseri and Magli, as well as a few hymns, incantations, and lexical lists. No copies in the house of Entima Anu Enlil, no astronomy, astrology, or mathematics, and no Bariitu or Bit Rimki ('Bath House; a royal purification ritual) had such warnings, and most non-copied commentaries did not either. But conversely, several manuscripts of Summa Alu, Summa Izbu, and Sakikkii also lack curses, so the protected-unprotected dichotomy is not absolute. Most of the thirty-eight were owned by Sama8-iddin and Anu-iksur of the Sangu-Ninurta family or by IqiSa of the Ekur-zakirs (seven, seven, and thirteen respectively). However, at least five (13%) belonged to non-family members, suggesting that the prohibition on tablet movement-- or rather, change of ownership--was not as absolute as the colophons suggest.
But if people and objects were mobile, how stable were the texts they worked with? Oppenheim (1960: 413; 1977: 18) put great emphasis on the stasis of tradition--on works which 'at some point in their early history were frozen into a specific wording and an established arrangement of content. This standardization or canonization, which apparently began in 'the third quarter of the second millennium Bc; 'effectively maintained the [works'] original contents against the pressures of changing concepts and attitudes, preserving obsolete text material that would otherwise have certainly disappeared. Yet even when Oppenheim was writing, this was no longer the consensus view (although it may have been the majority one). For instance, Lambert (1957: 9) wrote:"Much Akkadian literature did assume a final fixed form, did become a textus receptus [ie., received text], but not all. The Gilgame' Epic never reached a canonical form, and Enuma Anu Enlil circulated in several variant official editions." 
Let us examine that claim in more detail. As Andrew George (2003: 31) points out, the famous Standard Babylonian recension of the Epic of Gilgames is first attested in the Neo-Assyrian period. Yet older versions survived in parallel with it from Assur, Kalhu, Huzirina, and perhaps also from Nineveh (edited by George 2003: 348-378). Interestingly, all four places also yielded witnesses to the Standard Babylonian recension. But that is not the full extent of the text's flexibility, as George (2003: 419-431) shows: 'variant vocabulary, variations in tense, the addition of single lines, the transposition of lines and, more rarely, more radical reordering are established features of the sources for the Standard Babylonian epic' (George 2003: 430). And other major literary works--the Epic of Anzu, Atram-hasis, and Istar's Descent--all circulated in variant versions in the cities of Assyria too (George 2003: 31). Likewise the seventy-tablet celestial omen compendium Eniima Anu Enlilhas proved increasingly resistant to 'composite edition--the compilation of a single-line text from multiple witnesses--as its editors have progressed further into the series. The ancient tablet numbering starts to bifurcate in the low 20s (Soldt 1995), while later sections, such as those on Venus and Jupiter, have to be treated as a multiplicity of variant manuscripts (Reiner and Pingree 1998; 2005). One can adduce a great number of further examples too: later sections of the terrestrial omen series Summa Alu are very diverse (Freedman 2006), while the compendium of cultic toponyms Tintir = Babylon was divided variously into four or five chapters (Veldhuis 1998). And although large numbers of divination queries posed by bartis were often compiled into groups, sometimes running over several tablets, it has proved impossible so far to put them into any standardized order (Robson 2009). However, this should not surprise us as much as it does, conditioned as we are to think in terms of cuneiform 'canonization. As Francesca Rochberg (1984) argued a quarter of a century ago, the Akkadian terms iskaru 'series and ahd 'extraneous did not connote value judgements about canonicity and non-canonicity. As she showed for the NeoAssyrian manuscripts of Entima Anu Enlil, the term iskaru simply represented material from a compiled series already known to a scholarly community, while ahi described similar material from parallel textual traditions that was new to them. It may well turn out that one group's aha was another group's iskaru; certainly we must always be wary of the composite edition, 'a text which, ironically, [becomes] "canonical" to the Assyriological world but never existed in this form in antiquity' (Veldhuis 2003: 629).

CONCLUSIONS

By turning our attention from tablets as witnesses of scholarly compositions to tablets as artefacts created by historically situated individuals our view of the 'stream of tradition' radically alters. We start to penetrate its apparently smooth, unbroken surface to the turbulent currents underneath. At this stage of research it is still mostly a matter of describing local particularities than attempting to account for them, but by this means it will eventually be possible to complement the still vital work of textual edition with a comprehensive historical account of Mesopotamian intellectual culture.'
Text editions and English translations of many of the scholarly tablets from Huzirina, Kalhu, and Uruk can be found online in The Corpus of Ancient Mesopotamian Scholarship (http:// oracc.org/cams/gkab). Rochberg (1984), Lieberman (1990), and Veldhuis (1998) are essential readings on cuneiform canonicity. Michalowski (1995) gives important insights into the nature of Mesopotamian literary production. The methodology underlying this chapter is heavily influenced by recent work on the history of the book and the sociology of science. See especially Robert Darnton's work on the book 'communications circuit' (1982, 2007) with the critique by Adams and Barker (1993) on the one hand, and the works of Latour (1987) and Livingstone (2003) on the other.

# BIBLIOGRAPHY

Adams, T.R. and Barker, N. 1993.'A new model for the study of the book' in N. Barker (ed.), A Potencie of Life: Books in Society. The Clark Lectures 1986-1987. London: British Library, PP. 5-43.

Al-Rawi, E.N.H. 1995. "Tablets from the Sippar Library, IV: Lugale', Iraq 57: 199-223.

2002. "Tablets from the Sippar Library, X: A dedication for Zabaya of Larsa, Iraq 64: 247-8.

Al-Rawi, R.N.H. and George, A.R. 1995. "Tablets from the Sippar Library, V: An incantation from mis pi, Iraq 57: 225-8.

Anonymous, 1987. 'Excavations in Iraq, 1985-6; Iraq 49: 231-52.

Beaulieu, P.-A. 2006. "The astronomers of the Esagil temple in the fourth century Bc' in A.K. Guinan et al. (eds.), If a Man Builds a Joyful House: Assyriological Studies in Honor of Erle Verdun Leichty, Cuneiform Monographs 31. Leiden and Boston: Brill, pp. 5-22.

Black, J.A. 2009. "The libraries of Kalhw in J.E. Curtis, J. McCall, D. Collon, and L. Al-Gailani Werr (eds.), New Light on Nimrud: Proceedings of the Nimrud Conference, 11th-13th March 2002. London: British Institute for the Study of Iraq, pp. 261-5.

Britton, J. 1993. 'Scientific astronomy in pre-Seleucid Babylom in H.D. Galter (ed.), Die Rolle der Astronomie in den Kulturen Mesopotamiens, Grazer Morgenlandische Studien 3. Graz: RM Druck- & Verlagsgesellschaft, pp. 61-76.

' This chapter was written as part of the research project, 'The Geography of Knowledge in Assyria and Babylonia, 700-200 Bc' (http://oracc.org), co-directed by Eleanor Robson and Steve Tinney and funded by the UK Arts and Humanities Research Council from 2007 to 2012. It would not have been possible without the indefatigable work of our colleagues on the project past and present: MarieFrancoise Besnier, Philippe Clancier, Graham Cunningham, Ruth Horry, Frances Reynolds, Kathryn Stevens, and Greta Van Buylaere. 

Brown, D.R. 2000. Mesopotamian Planetary Astronomy-Astrology, Cuneiform Monographs, 18. Groningen: Styx.

Cavigneaux, A. 1981. Textes scolaires du temple de Nabii sa hare, Texts from Babylon, 1. Baghdad: Ministry of Culture and Information, State Organization of Antiquities and Heritage.

Clancier, P. 2009. Les bibliotheques en Babylonie dans la deuxieme moitie du I* millenaire av. J.-C., Alter Orient und Altes Testament 275. Miinster: Ugarit-Verlag.

Darnton, R. 1982. 'What is the history of books? Daedalus 111/3: 65-83.

2007.'"What is the history of books?" revisited, Modern Intellectual History 4: 495-508.

Dijk, J. van and W.R. Mayer. 1980. Texte aus dem Res-Heiligtum in Uruk-Warka, Baghdader Mitteilungen, Beiheft 2. Berlin: Mann.

Edzard, D.O. 1997. Gudea and his Dynasty, Royal Inscriptions of Mesopotamia. Early Periods, 3/1. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.

Fahdil, A. 1998.'Der Prolog des Kodex Hammurabi in einer Abschrift aus Sippar' in XXXIV*(tm)* Rencontre Assyriologique Internationale. Ankara: Tiirk Tarih Kurumu Basimevi, 717-29.

and Hilgert, M. 2008. "The cultic lament "a gal-gal buru,, su-su" in a manuscript from the "Sippar Library", Zeitschrift fiir Orient-Archdologie 1: 154-93.

Fincke, J.C. 2004. "The British Museum's Ashurbanipal Library Project, Iraq 66: 55-60.

Frahm, E. 2004. 'Royal hermeneutics: Observations on the commentaries from Assurbanipal's libraries at Nineveh; Iraq 66: 45-50.

Frayne, D. 1997. Ur III Period (2112-2004 Bc), Royal Inscriptions of Mesopotamia. Early Periods, 3/2. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.

Freedman, S.M. 2006. If a City is Set on a Height: The Akkadian Omen Series Summa alu ina male sakin, Occasional Publications of the Samuel Noah Kramer Fund, 19. Philadelphia: University Museum.

George, A.R. 1986. "The topography of Babylon reconsidered, Sumer 44: 7-24.

2003. The Babylonian Gilgamesh Epic: Introduction, Critical Edition and Cuneiform Texts. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

George, A.R. and Al-Rawi, E.N.H. 1996. "Tablets from the Sippar Library, VI: Atrahasis, Iraq 58: 147-90.

1998. "Tablets from the Sippar Library, VII: Three wisdom texts; Iraq 60: 187-206.

Gesche, P.D. 2001. Schulunterricht in Babylonien im ersten Jahrtausend v. Chr., Alter Orient und Altes Testament, 275. Miinster: Ugarit-Verlag.

Gurney, O.R. 1997. 'Scribes at Huzirina, Nouvelles Assyriologiques Breves et Utilitaires, 1997: no. 17.

Gurney, O.R. and J.J. Finkelstein. 1957. The Sultantepe Tablets, 1. London: British Institute of Archaeology at Ankara.

Gurney, O.R. and P. Hulin. 1964. The Sultantepe Tablets, 11. London: British Institute of Archaeology at Ankara.

Heefel, N. 2008. 'Astrological medicine in Babylonia in A. Akasoy, C. Burnett, and R. Yoeli-Tlalim (eds.), Astro-Medicine: Astrology and Medicine, East and West, Micrologus' Library, 25. Florence: SISMEL Edizioni del Galluzzo, pp. 1-16.

Houston, G.W. 2009. 'Papyrological evidence for book collections and libraries in the Roman empire in W.A. Johnson and H.N. Parker (eds.), Ancient Literacies: The Culture of Reading in Greece and Rome. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 233-65.

Hunger, H. 1968. Babylonische und Assyrische Kolophone, Alter Orient und Altes Testament 2. Kevelaer: Butzon & Bercker; Neukirchen-Vluyn: Neukirchener Verlag.

1976. Spdtbabylonische Texte aus Uruk, 1, Ausgrabungen der Deutschen Forschungsgemeinschaft in Uruk-Warka, Endberichte 9. Berlin: Mann.

Hunger, H., Sachs, A.J., and Steele, J.M. 2001. Astronomical Diaries and Related Texts from Babylonia, vol. 5: Lunar and Planetary Texts. Vienna: Verlag der Osterreichen Akademie der Wissenschaften.

sma'il, K.S. 1999-2000. "Tablet from the Sippar Library: Dating for two Sumerian kings, Sumer 50: 7-10.

Lambert, W.G. 1957.''Ancestors, authors, and canonicity, Journal of Cuneiform Studies 11: 1-14.

Latour, B. 1987. Science in Action: How to Follow Scientists and Engineers through Society. New Haven: Harvard University Press; Milton Keynes: Open University Press.

Lieberman, S.J. 1990. 'Canonical and official cuneiform texts: Towards an understanding of Assurbanipal's personal tablet collection in T. Abusch, J. Huehnergard, and P. Steinkeller (eds.), Lingering Over Words: Studies in Ancient Near Eastern Literature in Honor of William L. Moran. Atlanta: Scholars Press, pp. 305-36.

Livingstone, D.N. 2003. Putting Science in its Place: Geographies of Scientific Knowledge. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Lloyd, S. and GekC/e, N. 1953. 'Sultantepe: Anglo-Turkish joint excavations, 1952, Anatolian Studies 3: 27-47.

Maul, S.M. 2003. 'Wie die Bibliothek eines assyrischen Gelehrten wiederersteht' in J. Marzahn and B. Salje (eds.), Wiedererstehendes Assur: 100 Jahre deutsche Ausgrabungen in Assyrien. Mainz: Philipp von Zabern, pp. 175-82.

2010. 'Die Tontafalbibliothek aus dem sogenannten "Haus des Beschwerungs priesters"" in S.M. Maul and N.P. HeefSel (eds.), Assur-Forschungen: Arbeiten aus der Forschungsstelle 'Edition literarische Keilschrifttexte aus Assur' der Heidelberger Akademie der Wissenschaften. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, pp. 189-228.

Michalowski, P. 1995. 'Sailing to Babylon, reading the dark side of the moon in J.S. Cooper and G.M. Schwartz (eds.), The Study of the Ancient Near East in the Twenty-first Century: The

William Foxwell Albright Centennial Conference. Winona Lake, IN: Eisenbrauns, pp. 177-93.

Michel, C. 2003. Old Assyrian Bibliography of Cuneiform Texts, Bullae, Seals and the Results of the Excavations at Assur, Kiiltepe/Kanis, Acemheyiik, Alisar and Bogazkey, Old Assyrian Archives, Studies 1. Leiden: Nederlands Instituut voor het Nabije Oosten.

Moorey, P.R.S. 1978. Kish Excavations, 1923-1933. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

Oppenheim, A.L. 1960. 'Assyriology: Why and how?, Current Anthropology 1: 409-23.

1977. Ancient Mesopotamia: Portrait of a Dead Civilization, rev. E. Reiner. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Parpola, S. 1983. 'Assyrian library records, Journal of Near Eastern Studies 42: 1-29.

Pedersen, O. 1985-86. Archives and Libraries in the City of Assur: A Study of the Material from the German Excavations, 2 vols. Uppsala: Almqvist & Wiksell.

1998. Archives and Libraries in the Ancient Near East, 1500-300 Bc. Bethesda, MD: CDL

Press.

2005. Archive und Bibliotheken in Babylon: Die Tontafeln der Grabung Robert Koldeweys 1899-1917, Abhandlungen der Deutschen Orient-Gesellschaft 25. Saarbriicken: SDV.

Reiner, E. and Pingree, D. 1998. Babylonian Planetary Omens, III, Cuneiform Monographs, 11. Groningen: Styx.

2005. Babylonian Planetary Omens, IV, Cuneiform Monographs, 30. Leiden: Brill.

Robson, E. 2004. 'Mathematical cuneiform tablets in the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford; SCIAMVS: Sources and Commentaries in Exact Sciences 5: 3-65.

2007a. 'Gendered literacy and numeracy in the Sumerian literary corpus' in

G. Cunningham and J. Ebeling (eds.), Analysing Literary Sumerian: Corpus-Based

Approaches. London: Equinox, pp. 215-49.

2007b. Secrets de famille: pretre et astronome a Uruk a lepoque hellenistique' in C.M. Jacob

(ed.), Les lieux de savoir 1: Lieux et communautes. Paris: Albin Michel, pp. 440-61.

2008a. Mathematics in Ancient Iraq: A Social History. Princeton: Princeton University

Press.

2008b.'Mesopotamian medicine and religion: current debates, new perspectives, Religion

Compass 2 (2008): 455-83.

2009. Review of W.G. Lambert, Babylonian Oracle Questions (2007), Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies 72: 559-60.

----., forthcoming a. 'Reading the libraries of Assyria and Babylonia in J. K6nig, K. Oikonomopolou, and G. Woolf (ed.), Ancient Libraries. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

----., forthcoming b. 'Libraries and tablet collections in first-millennium Assyria and Babylonia in G. Barjamovic and K. Ryholt (eds.), Libraries before Alexandria: Library Tradition in the Ancient Near East. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Rochberg, F. 1984. 'Canonicity in cuneiform texts, Journal of Cuneiform Studies 36: 127-44.

1998. Babylonian Horoscopes, Transactions of the American Philosophical Society, 88/1.

Philadelphia: American Philosophical Society.

2004. The Heavenly Writing: Divination, Horoscopy, and Astronomy in Mesopotamian Culture. Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press.

Scurlock, J. 2005-06. 'Sorcery in the stars: STT 300, BRM 4.19-20 and the Mandaic Book of the Zodiac, Archiv fiir Orientforschung 51: 125-46.

Soldt, W.H. van. 1995. Solar Omens of Endma Anu Enlil: Tablets 23 (24)-29 (30). Istanbul: Nederlands Historisch-Archaeologisch Instituut te Istanbul.

Stevens, K. 2009. 'Secrets in the library: Cursed and protected scholarship in ancient Mesopotamia, unpublished MPhil essay, University of Cambridge.

Strassmaier, J.N. 1889. Inschriften von Nabuchodonosor, Kenig von Babylon (604-561 v. Chr.) von den Thontafeln des Britischen Museums. Leipzig: Pfeiffer.

Thureau-Dangin, F. 1922. Tablettes d'Uruk a l'usage des pretres du temple d'Anu au temps des Seleucides, Textes Cuneiformes du Louvre, 6. Paris: Geuthner.

Veldhuis, N. 1998. "TIN.TIR = Babylon, the question of canonization and the production of meaning; Journal of Cuneiform Studies 50: 77-85.

2000. 'Kassite exercises: Literary and lexical extracts, Journal of Cuneiform Studies 52:

67-94.

2003.'On the curriculum of the Neo-Babylonian school, Journal of the American Oriental

Society 123: 627-33.

2004. Religion, Literature, and Scholarship: the Sumerian Composition 'Nanse and the Birds', Cuneiform Monographs, 22. Leiden: Brill.

Weiher, E. von 1982. Spdtbabylonische Texte aus Uruk, II, Ausgrabungen der Deutschen Forschungsgemeinschaft in Uruk-Warka. Endberichte 10. Berlin: Mann.

---- 1988. Speitbabylonische Texte aus Uruk, III, Ausgrabungen der Deutschen Forschungsgemeinschaft in Uruk-Warka. Endberichte 11. Berlin: Mann.

1993. Spatbabylonische Texte aus dem Planquadrat U 18, IV, Ausgrabungen in UrukWarka. Endberichte 12. Mainz: Philipp von Zabern.

1998. Spdtbabylonische Texte aus dem Planquadrat U 18, V, Ausgrabungen in UrukWarka. Endberichte 13. Mainz: Philipp von Zabern.

Wiseman, D.J. and Black, J.A. 1996. Literary Texts from the Temple of Nabi, Cuneiform Texts from Nimrud, 4. London: British School of Archaeology in Iraq.



